Mr. {B.?} Keightley (Secretary): In the Proem to The Secret Doctrine, speaking of space, this is said (reads quotation, Volume I, pp. 8 et seq.1). That is just the few words on the subject of space in the ab- stract: but the first Sloka of the first Stanza runs as follows: “The Eternal Parent (Space), wrapped in her ever invisible robes, had slumbered once again for seven eternities,” and on this the first ques- tion that strikes one to ask is why is the Eternal Parent, or Space, called feminine here?

Blavatsky: Perhaps it is a mistake to do so. But since it is impossible to define Parabrahm, or that which is beyond human conception, therefore once that we speak of that first something which can be conceived, we had better say “She.” In all the cosmogonies it is the goddess and goddesses that come first, the former one becoming the all immaculate mother from which proceed all the gods. We have to adopt either one or the other gender, as we cannot say IT. From IT nothing can proceed, strictly speaking, neither a radiation nor an emanation.

Mr. Keightley: Is that the Egyptian Neith?

Blavatsky: In truth, it is beyond Neith. But it is Neith in one sense.

2 
Mr. Keightley: Then the IT itself is not the seven-skinned Eternal Father-Mother in this Stanza?

Blavatsky: Assuredly not. The IT is the beyond, the meta, the Parabrahm. This which is, is the female aspect of Brahmâ, the male.

Mr. Keightley: And that is what is spoken of in the Proem that I read as the “seven-skinned Father-Mother”?

Blavatsky: Yes, it becomes that at the first flutter of differentiation. Then the subjective proceeds to emanate—or falls into the objective and becomes what they called the Mother Goddess, from which proceeds the Logos or Father God, the unmanifested. For the manifested Logos is quite a different thing again and is called the “Son” in all the cosmogonies.

Mr. Keightley: Is the first differentiation from the absolute IT female always?

Blavatsky: It is sexless; but the female aspect is the first it assumes. Take the Jewish Kabalah. You have “Ain-Soph” which is also the IT, the infinite, the endless, the boundless, the adjectives used in conjunction with IT being negatives of every kind of attributes. From IT the negative, the zero, 0, proceeds number One, the positive which is Sephira or the Crown. The Talmudists say it is the “Torah,” the law, which they call the wife of “Ain-Soph.” Now see the Hindu cosmogony. There you find that Parabrahm is not mentioned; but only Mulaprakriti: there is Parabrahm and there is Mulaprakriti, which latter is the lining so to say, or the aspect of Parabrahm in the invisible universe. Mulaprakriti means the root of matter, but Parabrahm cannot be called the “root,” for it is the rootless root of all that is. Therefore, you must begin with Mulaprakriti, the veil of Brahma as they call it. Take any cosmogony in the world: you will always find it begins thus; the first manifestation is the Mother Goddess, the reflection, the root or the first plane of substance. From, or rather in that Mother Goddess is formed the unmanifested Logos her son and husband at once, as he is called the Concealed Father; and from these two the manifested Logos which is the Son itself—

3 
the Architect of all the visible universe.

Mr. Keightley: The second question is, “What aspect of space, or the unknown deity ‘That,’ of which you speak further on, is here called the Eternal Parent”?

Blavatsky: Well it is just this androgynous something; the Svabhavat of the Buddhists. It is non-differentiated, hence—an abstraction. It is the Mulaprakriti of the Vedantins. If you proceed to make it correspond with the human principles it will be Buddhi; Atma corresponding to Parabrahm. Then comes Mahat which corresponds to Manas.

Mr. Keightley: And so on downwards.

Blavatsky: Yes.

Mr. Keightley: Then what are the seven layers of space? You speak in the Proem of the “seven-skinned Father-Mother.”

Blavatsky: It is what Aristotle called the privation of matter; that which will become the seven planes of Being, beginning with the spiritual and passing through the psychic till it comes down to the material plane. Then there

[Page missing in original. See Appendix 1. p. 635]

has named the protyle; that which he would like to find, which he does not find, and which he certainly cannot find on this plane or earth. It is the first non-differentiated substance or spiritual matter.

Mr. Keightley: Is it Laya?

Blavatsky: “Robes” and all are in the Laya condition, up to that point from which the primordial substance begins to differentiate, and thus gives birth to the universe and all in it.

Mr. Keightley: Are they called “invisible” because they are not objective to any differentiation of the consciousness?

Blavatsky: Say rather “invisible” to consciousness, if any

4 
differentiated consciousness were possible at that stage of evolution. Most assuredly it cannot be seen. Do not you see in the book that even for the Logos Mulaprakriti is only a veil? And it is a veil that the Logos sees, this veil or the robes in which the Absolute is enveloped, but cannot perceive the latter.

The President: Is it correct to call it Mulaprakriti?

Blavatsky: If you speak to a Hindu you will find that what a Vedantin calls Mulaprakriti is called Aditi in the Vedas. The Vedanta philosophy means, literally speaking, “the end of all knowledge.” The great difficulty in studying the Hindu systems esoterically is that in India alone there are six schools of philosophy. Now if you analyse these you will find that they agree perfectly in substance. Fundamentally they are identical; but there is such a wealth of names, such a quantity of side issues, of all kinds of details and ornamentations; of sons being their own fathers, and fathers born from their own daughters, that you become lost in all this, as in a jungle. State anything you will from the esoteric standpoint to a Hindu, and if he only wants to he can contradict and prove you in the wrong, from the standpoint of his own particular sectarian view, or the philosophy he accepts. Each of the six schools of India has its own views and its own (to it) peculiar terms. So that, unless you hold strictly to some one school and say so, your special terminology is sure to be misunderstood. It is nothing but splitting hairs, and quarreling about things that have no importance in reality.

Mr. Keightley: Then the same term identically is used in quite a different sense by different philosophies: for instance Buddhi has one meaning in the esoteric philosophy, and a different meaning in the Snkhya?

Blavatsky: And quite a different meaning again in the Vishnu Purna in which there are seven Prakrit+s that come from Mahat and the latter is called Maha-Buddhi.

Mr. Keightley: That is again quite different.

5 
Blavatsky: No it is not; fundamentally it is perfectly the same thing, though in every philosophy you will have some other name and meaning given to it.

Mr. Kingsland: Yet we must call it something. Are we to have our own terms?

Blavatsky: I think the best thing you could do would be to coin new English words. If you want to ever become Western philosophers, you had better not take from the Hindus, who will be the first ones to say: “Behold, these Europeans! They take from us all they can, disfigure everything and do no good.” Find equivalents for all these terms, coin new English words, and do not depart from them; and then there will be no confusion.

Mr. Kingsland: Does protyle come near the term Laya?

Blavatsky: There it is. You are obliged to throw yourself on the tender mercies of ancient Greek and other ancient languages, but the modern languages are really too materialistic and I doubt whether you can get any words to express that which you need.

Mr. Ashton Ellis: We may as well get it from the Greek as the Anglo- Saxon; all our scientific words are coined either from the Greek or the Latin, and become English only by use. Such a word as protyle is not really English at all.

Mr. Keightley: It is just adopted.

Blavatsky: How long? Hardly two years ago?

The President: If we have one word that answers the purpose, why not use it? Mr. Crookes2 probably used the word protyle on the most materialistic plane of all.

Blavatsky: What he means by it, is primordial homogeneous matter.

6 
Mr. Ashton Ellis: Perhaps, just when it is about to enter into the state of differentiation.

Blavatsky: Then certainly it is not “the robes” that he will ever discover, because they are on the seventh plane of matter and he is searching on this one, which is the lowest.

Mr. Keightley: His protyle is “pre-hydrogen.”

Blavatsky: Nothing else, and yet no one will ever be able to find it. How many times have the scientists been disappointed. How often have they thought they had come at last to a real atom, protylic and homogeneous, to find it each time a compound thing of two or three elements! But let us go on.

Mr. Keightley: Is there, so to speak, on each of the seven planes, homogeneous matter relatively to that plane? Is it the root of every particular plane?

Blavatsky: There is; only it must be homogeneous only for that plane of perception and for those who are on that plane. If Mr. Crookes is ever able to find the protyle he is after it will be homogeneous for only him and us. The illusion may last for some time, until the Sixth Race perhaps, when mankind will be entirely changed. Humanity is ever changing, physically and mentally and perfecting itself with every Race more, as you know we are acquiring learning, perception and knowledge that we did not have before. Therefore, the science of today is the ignorance of tomorrow.

Dr. Williams: I should think it would be a great mistake to adopt any word that has been already adopted by a scientist with another meaning. Protoplasm had once come almost to mean the same thing as protyle does, but they have now narrowed it down.

Blavatsky: And quite right; because protyle, after all, comes from the Greek word U   {hyle}, and the Greeks used it certainly not as a word belonging to this plane. Besides which it was used in the Chaldean cosmogony, before the Greeks.

7 
The President: And yet is not ˻  {hyle} used to mean “the root of matter” by certain writers?

Blavatsky: It is; but these writers are not very ancient.

The President: No, but they used it in a sense which rather transcends that. The word U   {hyle} is now used really as giving very much the same idea that we endeavoured to give when we used the word Mulaprakriti.

Blavatsky: Well, I do not know. There’s Doctor Lewins, 3 who calls himself a Hylo-Idealist, if you please; so there is the metaphysical meaning of the word desecrated entirely. So you certainly had better use another term. Laya does not mean anything in particular, on that plane or the other, but means a state, a condition. It is a Sanskrit word conveying the meaning of something entirely undifferentiated and changeless, a zero-point wherein all differentiation ceases. That is what it means and nothing else.

Mr. Kingsland: The first differentiation would represent matter on the seventh plane?

Blavatsky: I believe, you can say so.

Mr. Kingsland: That is to say, I suppose that Mr. Crookes’ ideal protyle would be matter on its seventh plane.

Blavatsky: I do not know Mr. Crookes’ ideas about that. I am not sure, but what I understand he wants to find is simply matter in that state which he too calls the “zero-point.”

Mr. Keightley: Which would be so to speak the Laya point of this plane.

Blavatsky: I doubt whether he has any idea about other planes at all, and suspect he is perfectly satisfied with this one. What he wants to find here is the protyle atom, this is plain. But what

8 
can even he or any one else know of atoms, something that no one has ever seen. What is an atom to scientists but another “working hypothesis” added to all the rest? Do you know, Dr. Williams?

Dr. Williams: No, indeed I do not.

Blavatsky: But, as a chemist, you must know what they mean by it?

Mr. Kingsland: It is a convenient definition of what they think it.

Blavatsky: But surely they must have come now to the conclusion that it is no convenient definition, no more than their elements are. They speak about some sixty or seventy elements, and laugh at the old honest nomenclature of the four and five elements of the ancients, and yet where are their own elements? Mr. Crookes has come to the conclusion that strictly speaking there is no such thing known as a chemical element. They have never arrived yet at a simple or single molecule, least of all, at an atom. What is it then?

Mr. Kingsland: An atom is a convenient term to divide up a molecule.

Blavatsky: If it is convenient to them I have no objection to it. You call also iron an element, don’t you?

Mr. Ashton Ellis: I think we ought never to forget that it is called the atomic theory. It has never been claimed as anything more.

Blavatsky: Aye, but even the word “theory” is now used in a wrong sense, by the modern schools, as shown by Sir W. Hamilton. 4 Why should they, once they laugh at metaphysics, use a purely metaphysical term when applying it to physical science? And there are those to whom theory and axiom mean the same thing. So long as their pet theory is not today upset—which happens more often than the leap year—they regard it as an axiom; and woe to him, who dares doubt or even touch it, outside the sacred precincts of the fanes of science!

9 
Mr. Ashton Ellis: It is its inventor, Dalton,5 who called it atomic theory.

Blavatsky: Well, let us proceed.

Mr. Keightley: You speak of seven eternities. What are the seven eternities, and how can there be such a division in Pralaya when there is no one to be conscious of time?

Blavatsky: The modern astronomer knows “the ordinances of heaven” still less than his ancient brother did. Yet the fact, that if asked whether he could bring forth Mazzaroth6 in his season, or was with “him” who spread out the sky—the astronomer would reply in the negative—prevents him in no wise from speculating about the ages of the sun, moon, and geological times, when there was not a living man with or without consciousness on earth. Why could not the ancients speculate or cognize backward and forwards as moderns do?

Mr. Keightley: Why should you speak of seven eternities? Why put it that way?

Blavatsky: Because of the invariable law of analogy. As Manvantara is divided into seven periods so is Pralaya; as day is composed of twelve hours, so is night. Shall we say because we are asleep during night and are not conscious of time, that the hours do not run the same? They pass on and the clocks strike though we may not hear or count them. Pralaya is the “Night” after the Manvantaric “Day.” There is no one by and consciousness is asleep with the rest. But since it exists and is in full activity during Manvantara, and that it is fully alive to the fact that the law of analogy and periodicity is immutable, and being so that it must act equally at both ends, why cannot the sentence be used?

Mr. Ashton Ellis: I should want to know how you can count an eternity.
