

Keightley: Stanza 4, Sloka 1.

B. Keightley: (Reads the passage from The Secret Doctrine.)

Keightley: Question 1. Are the “Sons of the Fire” the subdivisions of the third Logos, or are they subdivisions of the Universal Mind? Are these two synonymous?

Blavatsky: You mean to say that you understand that the “Sons of the Fire” are simply a hierarchy of angels, or what?

Keightley: I understand that the “Sons of the Fire” are the various hierarchies comprised in the subdivision of the third Logos.

Blavatsky: The modern “Sons of the Fire,” that is to say, those of the Fifth Race and sub-race, are called so simply because by their wisdom they belong to the hierarchies, which are nearer to it, of the “divine sons of the fire mists,” the highest planetary Chohans or angels, but the “sons of the fire mists” who are spoken of here in the Stanza as addressing the “sons of the earth,” {are} the royal king’s instructors, who incarnated on this earth to teach nascent humanity. They belong as kings to the divine dynasties of which every ancient nation—India, Chaldea, Egypt, Homeric Greece, etc.—has preserved the tradition in some form or another. The subdivisions of the second Logos are unknown quantities, my dear sir, and those of the first or unmanifested Logos never existed except as a unity.

296 
Keightley: My question was the third Logos.

Blavatsky: What is it you ask?

Keightley: I say, are these subdivisions of the third Logos?

Blavatsky: Certainly; they must be, because the subdivisions of the second Logos are unknown quantities. Those of the first never existed except as a unity, therefore, they must be necessarily of the third; they cannot be anything else. It is the first manifested point.

Keightley: Then what relation have they to the universal mind?

Blavatsky: What relation have they? Which ones?

Keightley: These hierarchies.

Blavatsky: They belong to the hierarchies that I have been explaining to you many, many times, beginning by the “fire Chohans,” and the “fire angels,” then the “ether angels,” the “air angels,” the “water angels,” and the “earthly angels.” The seven lower Sephiroth are the earthly to the seven hierarchies of the seven elements, of which five you know, and two you don’t.

Kingsland: It would appear from what you say there, they also correspond to the races?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, they correspond to the divine dynasties. Where would be the intellectual races with brains and thought if it were not for these hierarchies who incarnated it?

Keightley: Then the “Sons of the Fire” are these divine instructors?

Blavatsky: In this sense they are. They are king’s instructors—those divine dynasties that the Chaldeans and the Egyptians and the Hindus have thus taken; even to the Greeks they are divine dynasties.

Keightley: Then so far as human beings are concerned, the “Sons of the Fire” are the highest incarnated on earth, as the “sons of

297 
the fire mists” are the highest in the celestial sphere.

Blavatsky: Yes, but they are also the “Sons of the fire mists,” as the Hierophants were called in the days of old.

Keightley: Are not they and the “divine dynasties” almost identical? That is to say, they must have been in connection; they were king initiates.

Blavatsky: Yes, and they were moreover [  ], all of them; they were incarnations. So the occult doctrine teaches of those celestial hierarchies who came and incarnated in man, that they were the highest of those. You see the most puzzling thing before an audience that has been brought up in the belief that for every baby that is born there is a soul, immediately produced by God, and this is a thing which is extremely puzzling: nobody seems to take in that philosophical idea that nothing can come out of nothing, not even the breath of God, at least not of an anthropomorphic God. Of a deity, of course, I understand, because everything is breath, divine essence; but I mean this God that comes and breathes over a child that is born, even a child of sin, this is a thing which is most puzzling.

Keightley: I think the great difficulty in that case is to realize that the underlying soul is one, as distinct from the separated bodies.

Blavatsky: How is it distinguished? It cannot be distinguished {from} that underlying soul, because it permeates every atom of the human body, and everything in the universe. There is not an atom of mud that is not permeated by the divine soul. If it were otherwise, it would not be infinite, you must have it infinite or you cannot admit the other thing.

Keightley: That is the difficulty—the idea of the individuality as compared with the one underlying reality.

Blavatsky: Can you tell me about this lamp? This fire in it, is it an individual fire?

Keightley: So far, yes. Certainly, I should say so.

298 
Blavatsky: Certainly, it is not. It is individual so long as it is in the lamp and it is confined to a vessel; but if you take it from there, it is not in any way any other fire than the one universal fire which is on earth—at least in our solar system. This you may bet your bottom dollar upon, there is no other. Mind you, I don’t say it is of the same essence, it is of the same, though in another form, just the same for the souls and for the monads.

Keightley: There I get the analogy, but the difficulty in all distinctions is to disabuse one’s mind of the idea that that is a separate piece of fire.

Blavatsky: He who wants to be an occultist has not to separate himself from anything in this world, and the moment he separates himself from any vessel of dishonour, he cannot belong to any vessel of honour; it is a perfect impossibility. You must either think of yourself as an infinitesimal something, not even individual, but a part of the one whole; or you are illusions, you are nobodies, and you will go out like breaths and leave no trace behind you. You are separate, so far as illusions are concerned. You are distinct bodies, every one of you, and you are marching about in masks furnished to you by “Maya.” Can you claim one single atom in your bodies which is your own? Can you stop a set of atoms? You do not pay even the slightest attention to them. What are you? Is it your own intellect or soul, or spirit? Everything from the spirit down to the last of the atoms is a part of the whole. It is a link. You break one and then everything goes into annihilation. A link cannot be broken, it is impossible.

B. Keightley: You see, you get a series of vehicles increasing in grossness, so to speak, as you proceed from spirit into matter, so that with each step downward you get more and more the sense of separateness developed, until you get lower down. And yet that cannot exist, because if there was a real and complete separation between any two human beings they would not be able to understand or communicate with each other in any sort of way.

299 
Keightley: Certainly; I am not arguing against the fact.

B. Keightley: But I am only putting that forward as a fact.

Keightley: Question 2: Are the “Sons of the Earth” simply human beings? If not, what?

Blavatsky: This question has just been answered. It is covered by the first answer.

Keightley: Then there is the passage: “The Fire, the Flame, the Day, this bright fortnight, the six months of the Northern Solstice departing (dying) in these, those who know the Brahman (yogis) go to Brahman,” etc, p. 86.

Blavatsky: It is from the Anugita.117

Keightley: Question 3. Will you give an explanation of these terms? What is the meaning of the sentence?

Blavatsky: The meaning is given plainly enough in the commentary of The Secret Doctrine. If you did not pay attention to it, you tell me and I will try to explain it to you more fully. Will you read this thing?

B. Keightley: (After reading from The Secret Doctrine.) And then you go on to speak about the different hierarchies, but you do not explain the statement in the quotation, that those departing at that period would go to Brahman, or in the other case would go to the [  ] {lunar light}.

Blavatsky: It means that the “devotees” are divided into two broad classes, those who reach Nirvana, and either accept or don’t accept it (Because they have the option of remaining on earth, at least in the atmosphere of doing good, or they have the option of going selfishly to plunge themselves into Nirvana and not caring for the world.), and those who do not do so and have not reached

300 
Nirvana. Now the first ones will never be reborn in this {Mahakalpa} or the hundred years of the age of Brahmâ—and which means 15 figures; and those who don’t reach Nirvana on earth, as Buddha and others did. It is all symbolical and metaphorical and easy enough to understand. I suppose “the Fire, the Flame, the Day, the bright fortnight of the moon” are all symbols of the highest absolute deity; those who had any such state of absolute purity as this symbol shows to be go to Brahman, that is to say, they have a right to {Moksha}. On the other hand, Smoke, Night, dark fortnight, etc. are all symbolical of matter and of ignorance, and those who die in such state of incomplete purification must of course be reborn. Only the homogeneous or pure and unalloyed spirit can become spirit and go to Brahman. It is as plain as can be that these are nothing but metaphors.

Keightley: Then what is the meaning of saying they are the highest deities or names of various deities?

Blavatsky: Because the hierarchies belonging to such are there connected correspondentially with the dark fortnight and the bright fortnight and the others that you read. Besides, I say it all pretends to esotericism. I never heard esotericism talked on a Thursday night before.

Keightley: It is a sort of transcendental astrology.

Blavatsky: It is para-metaphysics. Now question 4.

Keightley: You have already answered that. Question 4. What is the distinction between the yogis who do not return and the “devotees” who do return?

Blavatsky: Such is the distinction of the yogis who do not return on this earth—oh, I have answered this.

Keightley: Question 5.

B. Keightley: (Reads Sloka 2.)

301 
Keightley: Then there are the two quotations in the commentary which follow: “The First Primordial are the highest beings on the scale of Existence.” “The Primordial proceed from Father-Mother.”118 Question 5. Is Father-Mother here synonymous with the third Logos and not with Svabhavat in Darkness, as before, since it is now manifested and differentiated existence, “whereas the other manifested Quarternary and the seven proceed from the Mother alone”?

Blavatsky: Now you have put there two questions, to which I will give you two answers. The first primordial seven are born from the third Logos. This is before it is differentiated into the mother, when it becomes pure primordial matter in its first primitive essence—father, mother, potentially. All this is explained very plainly in the comment (a) of Sloka 2. Read it over, every word is explained there.

B. Keightley: (Reads passage from Secret Doctrine.)

Blavatsky: Now I will tell you. You asked what is synonymous there.

Keightley: Is Father-Mother here synonymous with the third Logos and not with Svabhavat in Darkness, as before, since it has now manifested and differentiated existence, “whereas the other manifested Quaternary and the seven proceed from the mother alone”?

Blavatsky: It is synonymous now with the third Logos, and Svabhavat is light, or manifestation. It is called both; it is perfectly interchangeable, as it was synonymous earlier with darkness, there it is Svabhavat in light, and in darkness the “first primordial” are always to be understood as the rays of the third Logos, not otherwise. They are the direct emanations of the secret [  ], because we reckon twice over. Father-Mother, Parabrahm, Mulaprakriti, the eternal ideal, the dual ideal potency in our mind and the Logos born from it are eternal. It is simply the difference between the existence—or simply

302 
the idea in esse and the idea in actu. I thought I had explained it perfectly well there.

B. Keightley: But one wants to come back, to know whether he understands it correctly.

Blavatsky: I thought you understood it correctly. Now, 6 is a continuation of this.

Keightley: Yes; question 6. What is Mother and what is Father in this sentence?

Blavatsky: Mother becomes the immaculate Mother only when differentiation is complete, otherwise there would be no such qualification. No one would speak, for instance, of pure spirit as an immaculate something, for it cannot be otherwise. Immaculate spirit becomes simply matter, so the immaculate mother shows to you that where qualification is possible, it is matter and it is lower; therefore the mother is the immaculate matter which begins the hierarchy. That will end by humanity and man, because it must begin by something which Father-Mother cannot be. They are in the beginning ideally potential; then in potentiality it becomes mother alone, because what is mother? Take the etymology of the word, and you will find it is simply matter, and this matter is the primordial matter which is alone, and after that, of course, the immaculate mother. The idea of the immaculate mother comes from that, because the spirit is invisible.

Keightley: Then one gets rather into difficulties in trying to understand the thing, because here you have the third Logos, which is Father-Mother in manifestation, isn’t it?

Blavatsky: You will have time, if you please, to be confused and perplexed. You will find something more difficult, yet they are all interchangeable. Now, you see, it is just the same as though you were to take to task a chemist because he would show to you some compound or chemical preparation, and he would give you this name, and then he would call something by another name; but they

303 
are all one and all different. This is a thing you have to learn. It is the order of proceeding. You cannot go further because you would simply cobweb your head with perfectly useless things, unless you want to become a metaphysical Vedantin and go and give lectures upon it. I tell you, you will only confuse yourself and nothing more.

Keightley: My only object is to find out what is meant.

Blavatsky: What are you? You think you are—you are not at all. It is conceit. You are a part of humanity, though you are Archibald Keightley; and what is humanity? Humanity is a part of thousands of millions of humanity that passed away. It is a piece of dirt, nothing else. And what is the world? It is a little speck of dirt in the Universe. You cannot come and have this spirit of separateness—though you be an Englishman and a Conservative.

Keightley: When one is an illusion one wants to understand one’s relation.

Blavatsky: An illusion is an illusion. If you thought you understood it, you would be perfectly disenchanted.
