
Kingsland: That Sun might have belonged to any other system far away.

316 
Blavatsky: There are millions and millions of systems. What is the use of your talking about this little horizon?

Kingsland: Do you say this earth of which this is composed came originally from the Milky Way?

Blavatsky: But mind you, you know what it is: there was the focus, that was prepared material, and it was in the Milky Way; and when it throws off its principles, it comes and animates, so to say, one of those things from the ready material.

Keightley: And these are the results of building on the imperishable centres.

Blavatsky: Yes, on the Laya centres.

Kingsland: Then is that Milky Way, as astronomers suppose, so far outside the limits of the solar system, or is that only an appearance? The astronomers suppose that the Milky Way lies far beyond the distance of the furthest fixed stars that we can see; is that actually the case, or is that a deceptive appearance?

Blavatsky: My idea is it is a deceptive appearance; it is very deceptive, because this thing that we see, it is only because it is at a distance that we see it, but this thing actually exists everywhere, in the atmosphere and everywhere. It is not that there is a particular thing at such and such a distance, so many miles away; it is perfect nonsense, because it is everywhere, though only at a certain distance we see it.

Kingsland: If you take only a foot section you do not see it.

Blavatsky: Just that. It is the same with every bit. This is what we call the prepared world-stuff which is ready for use, which has been differentiated and redifferentiated and combed out and everything has been done to it. And the other is simply everything that is otherwise, and the space which is between this inter-Milky Way space is nothing but ready material.

317 
Kingsland: Can you tell us why they should appear more or less in the shape of a ring, instead of all round with equal density?

Blavatsky: I suppose there must be some reason. It must take absolutely some geometrical figure and space. You know, this is why with Pythagoras, geometry was the first sacred science which had to be studied and known before one could join the Pythagorean school; they had to study geometry and music, first of all. Now they ask, why music? Because of the sounds, you understand, the correspondences, that is why. You go and read the sacred science and you will find they had to know, among other things, mathematics, geometry and music. They had to know all these.

Kingsland: We want something more about the meteors.

Blavatsky: They ask me as though I were first cousin to the meteors, or the mother-in-law, or something like that.

Kingsland: I thought you had something more about it in your notes.

Blavatsky: I do not want any notes; I know what you are going to say without notes. It is only a few “happy thoughts” I book there.

Kingsland: I want to know what is the occult explanation of the meteors.

Blavatsky: Why, didn’t I explain to you enough? Who is it that is dissatisfied?

B. Keightley: Are the meteors these fragments streaming through space, or what are they?

Blavatsky: In my humble opinion, I do not make much difference between a comet and a meteor. A meteor is something which is a dead comet, or something like that.

Kingsland: Are we right in supposing the meteors get their incandescence by coming into contact with our atmosphere?

318 
B. Keightley: Well, there is one of the things: meteors have no tails.

Blavatsky: They are corpses.

Kingsland: What makes them incandescent?

Blavatsky: It is the nature of the beast, I suppose.

B. Keightley: We only see them when they come very close to the earth.

Blavatsky: You tell me why the comets are the cheekiest people you ever met with. They always cheek the Sun and snub him; they wag their tails against the Sun in all defiance of gravity, and the poor Sun stops and looks there in amazement and cannot help it. You tell me that, you gentlemen physicists and men of science.

Keightley: Perhaps it is a tone of contempt.

Blavatsky: They will penetrate right through in the most terrible way, and go into his drawing room and bedroom and come out of the kitchen and then go and wag their tails in defiance of all gravity. And the men of science will come and say: “Gravity! It cannot be; it is an immutable law.” Is it? I am glad to hear it.

B. Keightley: What is the explanation of this extremely light- minded behavior?

Blavatsky: You make their acquaintance and ask them. I have no right to give out their secrets. It only puts there is no gravity, there is no such attraction and repulsion.

Keightley: Why should the tail be repelled?

Blavatsky: Because the Sun is not congenial to the tail. It has got quite enough of its own electricity and its own magnetic heat and doesn’t want to spoil its complexion.

Keightley: You speak in The Secret Doctrine of the mysterious planet in connection with the moon. Does the moon act to that

319 
planet as a kind of veil in the same way as the things of the Sun?

Blavatsky: I think there is something—not behind the Moon, because the Moon is not motionless as the Sun, the Sun is always on the same spot—but the moon has not got such an electric thing. The moon has only magnetic power over the earth.

Keightley: I thought it might be an analogy.

B. Keightley: The moon has its own independent orbit; it doesn’t cover any one point of space constantly.

Blavatsky: There are some planets, or something (I do not know what.) they do not pay much attention to, because it is not their time yet to appear. They may appear.

Kingsland: Between Mercury and the Sun?

Blavatsky: Oh, it is surely the planet between Mercury and the Sun. It was the beginning of the Fourth Race and then it went off. Just the same as if you take the Pleiades; it was seen very well once, and now it is seen no more. You can hardly see it in the telescopes, but it {Maia} was a bright one and a chief one, the nurse of [  ] {Arcas}.

Gardner: That was the seven Pleiades.

Blavatsky: They say it is because she married below her station and she was ashamed to show herself. They say it in the Greek mythology, that she made a mésalliance; she was a kind of Princess Louise, she married one of her subjects.123 But these Pleiades are the most occult constellations that exist.

Gardner: More than Mercury?

Blavatsky: Oh, more. They are connected with nearly all the aristocracy. They are very occult, because they are connected with all

320 
the Rishis, too; they have an interchange of thought with the Rishis.

Hall: “The sweet influence of the Pleiades.”124

Blavatsky: If you read those allegories of the Hindus in the astronomy books, you see they had secrets and knowledge which really the moderns cannot think of approaching.

Gardner: Which old books do you refer to?

Keightley: The Puranas.

Blavatsky: Even the Puranas. But you read the old astronomical books.

Keightley: Then about the Sun following slowly after the planets, turning upon itself, the actual revolution of the Sun itself.

Blavatsky: Now, there is a thing! This is the most extraordinary thing, how they knew this. See what Bailly says about that.125 There is not one second’s difference if it is so, it is as the Hindus give it, because it is so mathematically correct; they have remarked it and they said because such and such constellations were in conjunction, and so on.

Hall: Why do we only see one side of the moon?

Blavatsky: Because she doesn’t want to show the other; because perhaps she has not combed her hair. I can only tell you what I have learnt, I can’t invent.

Keightley: You don’t tell us all you know.

Blavatsky: I do not see why I should; we should have nothing for next Thursday.

Gardner: You were saying something about the Rishis of the

321 
Ursa Major.

Blavatsky: The seven stars, and they are married. The Rishis are the husbands of the Pleiades.

Gardner: But which one made the mésalliance? (Loud laughter.)

Blavatsky: The one which hides herself.

Keightley: Gardner, you must not talk celestial scandal!

Blavatsky: It was Electra. (Qy. Should this not be Merope? B deB.)126 {Added to text}.

Gardner: Is he the one?

Blavatsky: It was a she! What an infidel! Well, I think you ladies and gentlemen can all talk now, and I will faithfully answer your questions.

The proceedin