
Keightley: Stanza 4, Sloka 6. “Then the Second Seven, who are the Lipika produced by the three (Word, Voice, and Spirit.)” Question 1. Can you explain to us the relation of the Lipika, the “Second Seven,” to the “Primordial Seven,” and to the first “Sacred Four”?

Blavatsky: I think it is rather a difficult thing to do. I think that if I explain to you, who know very little of the Sanskrit books, that which you have access to—for instance, these various systems of the Gnostics that you can easily get in the British Museum—you would understand it better. Now, I have taken from one something just to show to you this difference, and make you understand it better. If you study the Gnostic system of the first centuries of Christianity, from that of Simon Magus127 down to the highest and noblest systems—the Valentinians128—you will comprehend better the relation you want me to explain. All these systems are derived from the East. That which we call the Primordial Seven and the Second Seven are called by Simon Magus, for instance, the Æons. The Valentinians call them the Æons, and many others, the primeval—the second and the third series of Syzygies, 129 I think it is—it is a Greek name. They are

324 
graduated emanations ever descending lower and lower into matter from that primordial principle that is called fire. Simon Magus calls it fire and we call it Svabhavat, as behind that fire the manifested, the Silent Deity, stands with him as with us—that which is, was and ever will be. Therefore, take this fire, as he calls it, and that will be the root from which all these various powers and hierarchies descend. Therefore, since his doctrine is almost one with our cosmogony (And that you don’t seem to see to this day, the philosophy or process of emanation.), permit me to quote to you the words of Simon Magus, as quoted from his work by the author of Philosophumena. He says: “From the permanent stability and personified immutability, fire and this manifested principle, which immutability does not preclude activity, as the second form is endowed with intelligence and reason, who are (Mahat), it (The fire.) passed from potentiality of action to action itself. From those series of evolutions were formed six beings, or the emanations from the infinite potency they were formed in Syzygies. That is to say, they are radiated out of the flame two by two, one being the active and the other the passive principle.” Then Simon named Nous and [  ] {Epinoia}, or spirit and thought, and many others; and Logismos and Fumesis {Enthumêsis}, reasoning and reflection. Now, Simon shows the relation you want to know by saying as follows: “In each of the six primitive beings, the Infinite potency was in its totality, but it was there in potentiality only, not innate. It had to be established therein through an image, that of paradigm, in order that it should appear in all its essence, virtue, grandeur, and effects; for only then could it become like unto the parent potency, infinite and eternal. If on the contrary it was not conformed by or through the image, that potentiality could never become potency or pass into action but was lost for lack of use, as it happens to a man who, having an aptitude for grammar or geometry, does not exercise it; it gets lost for him just as if he never had it” (Page 250.)130 Now, one of these, which he calls Nous, spirit,

325 
and the other are one, he says, and inseparable. The system is too long and too complicated to give it here. Suffice it to say that he shows that whether his Æons belong to the superior, middle or lower world, they are all one except in material density, which determines their outward manifestation and the results produced and the real essence which is from their mutual relations, which are established from eternity, as he says, by immutable laws. The same, therefore, for the Lipika and the Second Seven or the Primordial Seven, whatever name we may give them for the sake of our own comprehension, which seems to necessitate a name or label in each case to enable us to recognize one from the other. Now, this first, second, third or primordial seven or Lipika is all one; therefore, how can I tell you what relation they are in? When once they emanate from one plane onto another it will be just the same, the repetition—as it is above so it will be below. That is the only relation. They are all simply differentiated in matter in density, but not in qualities. And the same qualities descend unto the last plane, which is our plane, and which shows man endowed just with the same potentiality, if he knows how to develop it as the highest Dhyan-Chohan. I quote it just on purpose to show you, because you can go and read it. In the British Museum you have the book, and there are many things which really will show to you that our doctrine is as old as can be. It is perfectly the occult doctrine in many things. Of course, it changes its name and all kinds of things; but it gives a very good definition of the nature and essence of these Æons only. For instance, he gives six of them, that is to say, six pairs of each—the seventh being that four which descends from one plane to another.131

Keightley: Then practically, the synthesis is on the plane above.

Blavatsky: Yes, just that.

The President: Then really these sevens are all identical, except that

326 
they are manifest on different planes, so that the Lipika are the same things as the Primordial Seven, except that the Primordial Seven are not manifest, they are the potentiality of manifestation.

Blavatsky: They are the first, but they are four, mind you, and have proceeded from Mahat, as I will show you. The Lipika are those who, in the Kabalah, are called the four recording angels. In India they call them the four Maharajahs, those who record every thought and deed of man. It is the book of life, as St. John calls it in Revelation.

The President: But they are called the seven in that passage, I think, of The Secret Doctrine. But that really means that the four are on the plane of the second seven. It does not mean that they are precisely the second seven.

Blavatsky: Just so. And the seven are simply seventy times seven; it is the seven hierarchies, the seven various degrees. And at the four corners of the world, these Lipikas are posted just to put down on the superior Astral Light the record of all our actions, deeds, words and everything.

The President: On the lowest plane of all, they are the cardinal points.

Blavatsky: They are directly connected with Karma, and they are connected with what the Christians call the Last Day of Judgment. And in the East it is called the Day after Maha-Manvantara, when they come all to receive what is called in Sinnett’s Esoteric Buddhism the Judgment.

Keightley: “The Day Be With Us,” isn’t it?

Blavatsky: Yes, when everything becomes one, but with every Manvantara they become more and more, the Absolute becomes more and more, not only is it absolute intelligence, absolute consciousness and everything (Because on our plane it is non-consciousness, non- being.), but everyone will feel himself more; still every individuality knows itself. This may be a mysterious thing, but I tell you that which

327 
we are taught. Very often we are confronted with the statement: “you talk about Nirvana. What is Nirvana? It is an extinction, it is just like a flame that is blown out from the candle; there remains nothing. Nirvana—‘the flame out’.” I had how many times to have disputes and discussions about that. I said it is not that at all. It is that every particle of matter, of that which may have form in our conception or be conditioned or limited, everything disappears to make room for one homogeneity, and for the one absolute spirit. But this spirit is not at all; it is non-consciousness for us, but it is absolute consciousness there.

Keightley: Question 2. What relation have the Lipika to Mahat?

Blavatsky: That relation, that the Lipika are a division of the four degrees taken from the septenates that emanated from Mahat. This is what we have been talking about. The latter is as Simon Magus’s four, the Mahat, the secret and the manifested or the divine ideation made to witness for itself in the subjective universe through the subjective forms we see upon it. You may call it evolution or creation or whatever you like. What other relation can they have, except that of being wheels within wheels? They are workers on their own plane. If you ask me what relation the Lipika have with humanity, with men, then I have just told you what it was: they are the recorders.

Keightley: Then the Lipika are on the same plane as Mahat.

Blavatsky: They are the sons of Mahat, as they call them. Certainly, they are immediately under the absolute plane of divine ideation, but even that is a very risky thing to say, because immediately it suggests to you that it is like a staircase, and there are stories in the house, one below and the other above. But it is not so at all; it would be a very erroneous conception. It is everywhere and nowhere, just as when we were speaking about the circle and the point and circumference and all that, because it is not a thing above or below, and the right or the left; it is as I have been explaining many times,

328 
something which is—well, it may be in one place and yet they are the seven planes, they are states, and being states other than ours, of course they are invisible and perfectly incomprehensible to us, and each state does not know the people of the other state.

The President: But still, it would not be right to describe them as being on the same plane as Mahat.

Blavatsky: Certainly not.

The President: Mahat is the synthesis of the plane above the Lipika.

Blavatsky: Certainly, and the Lipika are in the middle of the plane on the four quarters, that is to say, the higher ether or the higher Astral Light and the lower Akasa. Akasa certainly goes beyond the seventh.

The President: Can you tell us exactly how they would correspond with the archetypal worlds of the Kabalists? Is it between that and the next?

Blavatsky: The Kabalists have only four worlds and we have seven, because they leave out entirely the three upper ones and begin counting simply the archetypal world, which is the highest Astral Light, just the four, there it is; but the others are left in silence, and they are not spoken about.

The President: The Lipika really are on the plane which is above the archetypal world.

Blavatsky: Together they are on that plane, because their world begins where our globe A begins. And if you take The Secret Doctrine, you find there the division of the four planes; you see four planes; it begins there just above our sphere. Their archetypal world goes down, they have got only four worlds.

B. Keightley: That places, so to speak, the Lipika in relation to the kabalistic conception and to the evolution perfectly. They are on the highest plane corresponding to the highest plane of our chain of

329 
globes.

Blavatsky: What is the use of talking a language no one would understand and cannot even conceive of?

Keightley: Question 3. What is the difference made here between Word, Voice and Spirit?

Blavatsky: The same as between Atman, Buddhi and Manas. In one sense, spirit emanates from the unknown darkness into the mystery of which none of us can penetrate. That spirit—call it the Spirit of God that moves on the face of the waters, if you like, or primordial substance—the spirit mirrors itself in these waters and produces thereby the first flutter of differentiation in the homogeneousness of primordial matter. This is the voice, the first flutter of differentiated matter, if you like, in this sense manifestation number one, and from that voice emanates the word or Logos, that is to say, the definite and objective expression of that which has hitherto remained in the depths of the concealed thought. Of course we cannot begin here about colours and sounds and all that, but I tell you kabalistically, and kabalistically you will find that. And mind you the one that mirrors itself in space is the third Logos; they call it the unknown.

Keightley: Then speaking there as you spoke, the Logos there is the subdivided seven Logoi.

Blavatsky: Yes.

Keightley: And the voice is the synthesis of the Logos?

Blavatsky: It is just like saying, as we say in the esoteric thing, the colour, the sound, and numbers. Well, the Logoi ought to stand for numbers, then, in this sense, or the numbers will come after that when they divide the hierarchies.

Gardner: What stands for the colour?

Blavatsky: Well, you try to dream of it.

330 
Keightley: Sloka 6 continued, etc. “The rejected Son is One, the ‘Son-Suns’ are countless.” Question 4. Is this sentence to be understood in the light of the explanations given on page 99 (c)? And if so, why is the “Rejected One” mentioned again here in connection with the “Second Seven”?

Blavatsky: I have been reading the whole page, and I don’t know what you mean. Where do I speak of the second seven? Unless it is the planets that you mean, in which case it would not be the second seven, it would by the seventy-seventh seven, because they are on the material plane.

B. Keightley: It is in this stanza. The stanza speaks of the second seven, and then goes on in the next sentence to speak of the “Rejected One,” and you have been speaking about the “Rejected One” in an earlier part of the stanza.

Blavatsky: But you forget I have been skipping an innumerable number of times not only lines, but whole stanzas. You know perfectly well I have given you only about twelve in the first and about 42 in the second.

B. Keightley: The thing is to find out whether there has been a gap there.

Blavatsky: Certainly you will find gaps. I just try to explain as much as I can. It says there the Son is one and the “Sons-Suns” are many. It does not mean our Sun. It means the Spiritual Sun. You read it there.

Keightley: Is the Spiritual Sun also the Rejected One?

Blavatsky: No, no, no. I say here it is said somewhere there that the Son and the “Son-Suns” are countless.

Keightley: It is the “Rejected One.”

Blavatsky: But it is this “Rejected One”; they are not the “Son-Suns.” I don’t call the planets the “Son-Suns.” I speak in

331 
general. The Spiritual Sun is one, but the “Son-Suns” are countless, and it does not refer at all to the planets.

Keightley: Then has not it an equal application to the planets as well?

Blavatsky: It may be something like that, but they are not any more suns now. They were suns. In other places I speak about this. I have read it very well.

B. Keightley: It was in the stanza, that quotation; that is what puzzled me about it.

Blavatsky: Oh yes. You will be puzzled more than once, you know.

Keightley: Stanza 5, Sloka 1. “The Primordial Seven, the first Seven Breaths of the Dragon of Wisdom, produce in their turn from their holy circumgyrating Breaths the Fiery Whirlwind.” Question 5: Can you explain in any way the necessity of each entity in becoming divine to pass through matter to self-experience?

Blavatsky: Well perhaps a sufficient reason might be found for it in the very nature of your question. This progress to a Divine state is but the first step, from our earth, at least, to Divine absorption. Now, the latter means that each entity will become Absoluteness when it reaches it—that is to say, that which contains all, and therefore every earthly experience, including the very strange question which is now offered (Because, really, it is a very strange question.) How could that Absoluteness become one, unless it contained every experience—that is to say, every stage and state of mind on the scale or ladder of collective experiences of beings? When you answer this, then I shall be able to proceed. Now answer me, how is it possible that Absoluteness, once that you reach it, there should be one single experience that would not be contained in it, including even the question that you put to me? It must be there.

Keightley: But it was there before.

332 
Blavatsky: It was there in [  ], as Simon Magus would say, it was in Divine ideation, when in Divine ideation it comes into Absoluteness. Divine ideation is not Absoluteness, it is the first manifestation of Absoluteness, and is Absolute. It is not the Absoluteness.

Keightley: Then the whole process of one Maha-Manvantara, that Divine ideation, after the previous Maha-Pralaya, shall become Absoluteness to again emanate another Divine ideation?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, because we all change. With every Maha-Manvantara we become entirely different, and everything becomes different. We cannot say we will be a little better, or have more rosy cheeks, or longer noses. We shall be entirely something we cannot conceive of. We are that which we are only in this Manvantara, which lasts some trillions and trillions of years. That is the teaching, at least. I don’t know anything about what we shall become. Therefore, I only know what we are now.

Keightley: That introduces a curious idea, that the Absolute of one Maha-Manvantara is different from the Absolute following it.

Blavatsky: Not at all. It is the same Absolute, only from this Absoluteness there are things which have been and things which are, but have not yet been, you understand, that which was is in that; that which will be is not yet, but it is still, it exists, but has not returned into Absoluteness. I don’t see how you cannot understand it?

Keightley: That sounds as if there was in the Absolute a series of paradigms.

Blavatsky: It is on our manifested plane that I speak to you, about the Mahat which is born. Mahat has a beginning in the beginning of a Manvantara, therefore it must have an end. I speak to you about Divine ideation, not in its Absoluteness before manifestation, but the first flutter of manifestation, the first differentiated, when this Mahat is born of Brahmâ, as they say in the Vishnu Purana. Now, that is quite a different thing. Absoluteness

333 
does not differentiate the one never-to-be-known ideation. We speak now on the plane of manifestation at every Manvantara.

Kingsland: Then Mahat is ever becoming, but never does become the Absolute.

Blavatsky: The Mahat is the Absolute of our Manvantara, if you like to say so. Perhaps you will find a better expression. I don’t say that I am Herbert Spencer, to come and invent new words, I simply try to tell you as I understand it.

The President: It is an Absolute which is not an Absolute. It is an Absolute which is limited.
