
Blavatsky: The Absolute cannot be limited.

The President: I know it cannot, really; at the same time, it is not the Absolute Absolute: there is that behind which contains the past, present, and future.

Blavatsky: That which they call fire, which is deity, from Simon Magus to the last, and we say in our philosophy it is this which was, is, and will be; and yet this which was, is and will be, is yet, has a beginning in every Manvantara before emanation begins. Now, every Æon becomes also, and is called in its turn that which was, is, and will be. So you take Philosophumena, you read the definition given by Simon Magus. Then take a better thing, take Valentinus, who was one of the highest philosophers, and one who explained it the best. You will see he calls it that which is, was, and will be. Every Æon will thus have a beginning, and an end, therefore, they are all emanations of the Absolute; they are not themselves Absolute.

Kingsland: Then in what sense do they become the Absolute?

Blavatsky: We are the Absolute, too. The spirit in us becomes the Absolute, but it is on its pilgrimage, it is this circumgyration.

Kingsland: In what sense do they become Absolute? Because it would appear from that in the next Manvantara, they have to pass

334 
to an experience.

Blavatsky: Because you cannot have anything which does not contain the Absolute. If it did not contain the Absolute it could not be anything and could not exist. There is not an atom in this world that has not got the Absolute in it.

Kingsland: When you speak of the Absolute in that sense, you don’t mean the rootless root.

Blavatsky: I do mean it.

Kingsland: But this Mahat becomes the rootless root.

Blavatsky: Mahat is but a name which people have invented to show the emanation of a certain Manvantara in the Divine ideation. Now, we must call it Absoluteness, we cannot call it anything else, because the philosophy of such terms is not very easy.

Kingsland: What is it that has to evolve?

Blavatsky: The illusion and nothing more, and that illusion more or less illusionary.

Kingsland: Then that has no relation to the Absolute.

Blavatsky: I beg your pardon, it has. It is because the Absolute evolves one thing, and we with our finite and little brains see another thing. We are not only colour-blind, we are truth-blind, and we are everything-blind, and we must take these things as they present themselves, but it is not the Absolute.

B. Keightley: Did you ever think out, Kingsland, the mathematical point of a limit?

Blavatsky: What is a mathematical point? Does it exist? Is there such an animal in nature as a mathematical point? You see, we are obliged to use such expressions. How can you come and—well I cannot invent a phraseology—how can you express that which is inexpressible?

335 
Kingsland: Well, of course, to our finite minds it is, we admit that, but we try to elucidate that one point. What is it that evolves?

Blavatsky: A Vedantin would tell you that it is an illusion, a Maha-Maya. That is why they call it illusion, because it lasts but a “wink of the eye,” though it may last millions of years for us. What is there in Eternity which has a beginning and an end which is of consequence? It is expressed in the Bible that a thousand years is as a “wink of the eye” to the Lord, but I say it is perfect nonsense to speak of thousands of years. You speak of trillions and even higher than that, and then you won’t be nearer the truth. Eternity is eternity, it cannot be divided, so as to say: half eternity and quarter of eternity, for then it cannot be eternity.

Keightley: Question 6. Are the atoms—in the occult sense of the term—eternal and indestructible, like the Monads of Leibniz, or are they dissolved during Pralaya?

Blavatsky: Now look at this question, if you please. This proves that the atoms are in your conceptions somethings, when there is no such thing in this world as atoms, except as mathematical points, as I say. The atoms, whether representing the Monads of Leibniz or the eternal and indestructible mathematical points of substance which our occult doctrine teaches, can neither be dissolved during Pralaya nor re-form during Manvantara. The atoms do not exist as appreciable quantities of matter on any plane. They are mathematical points of unknown quantity here. And whatever they are or may be on the seventh plane, each is and must be logically an absolute universe in itself, reflecting other universes and yet it is not matter and it is not spirit. Now, will you understand this? This is to say that which is Mahat or divine ideation, a sum total, and is a conceived fraction. Now when I speak of fraction, please don’t allow your materialistic conceptions to imagine that Absolute can be divided into parts or pieces. The Absolute is everywhere, even in the smallest molecules of matter. It can neither be pressed into the infinitesimal part, nor enlarged into a limitless cosmos; it is both. And so much the worse for us who have not enough of the metaphysical element

336 
to understand the explanation. How could Brahmâ be called, Anu for instance—an atom—if it was not something of the kind that I tried to explain to you? If it could be conditioned or limited by space or time or anything? The atom is and is not. The atom is the mathematical point, the potentiality in space; and there is not, I suppose, a space in this world that is not an atom. If you call it molecule, it is a different thing. But if you speak about the atoms of Democritus132 it is a different thing. Maybe he has been giving it in a very materialistic way, but if you speak about the atom, that which we call Anu, then certainly they have no substance that we know of.

Dr. Williams: Then what would you say was the ultimate constitution of the ordinary gases, like hydrogen and oxygen?

Blavatsky: Everything is an atom, but what are these atoms? We cannot see them, we cannot smell them or divide them; atoms are something science has accepted simply as hypothesis.

Dr. Williams: Most of them are detected by some one or other of the senses, if you admit that the gases do exist in the atomic form.

Blavatsky: Yes, if you call them molecules—the molecules that you have not yet come to, that Crookes has tried to divide and subdivide and he could not catch them, because every one of them might be divided ad infinitum—but when that becomes homogeneous, then you find these molecules become atoms. They may be the atoms of Democritus or somebody else, but they are not the atoms of esoteric science. It is quite a different thing.

Keightley: Question 7. In Occultism, are the true atoms conceived of as “particles” or as something nearer to what we may call “Vortex-Atoms”?

Blavatsky: I know nothing of “Vortex-Atoms,” first laughed at by science when they were talked of by [  ] {Helmholtz?}; and now, it appears, Sir W. Thomson accepts them. If you mean those of Sir William Thomson, I don’t know anything at all about them. Pass to 8.

337 
Keightley: Sloka 2. “They make of him the messenger of their will. The Dzyu becomes Fohat; the Swift Son of the Divine sons, whose sons are the Lipika, runs circular errands.” Question 8. Does this mean that the Lipika are the Sons of Fohat, or are they the Sons of the Primordial Seven?

Blavatsky: This means that they are the Sons of Fohat, as a personification of Mahat, the Manasaputras or “sons of the universal intelligences,” and it means that the Lipika are the Sons of the “Primordial Seven.” Whether the Lipikas’ marriage certificate is illegal will be next asked, I suppose. I would not wonder, because, for instance, what can I answer you to this? They are the sons; they cannot be the Sons, it is simply an expression used. “The Sons of Fohat” means just as the sons of Lipika, it is simply one coming down from above to below, and that is all.

Keightley: Sloka 3. “He is their guiding spirit and leader. When he commences work he separates the sparks of the lower kingdom (mineral atoms) that float and thrill with joy in their radiant dwellings (gaseous clouds), and forms therewith the germs of wheels…” Question 9. What is meant by the “mineral atoms” spoken of here? For the stanza seems to refer to a period before even the “Wheels” were formed or placed.

Blavatsky: It means that which is to become in this Manavantara; and the “mineral atoms,” that which was set apart for it in eternity; that is what it means and nothing else. You see, if the writers of the stanza were not born out of time they would learn to express themselves better; but really, I think it is impossible to satisfy you and to give you all these explanations. Now, those who wrote the stanzas wrote them just as they would write them in those times; they are perfectly philosophical, but if you come and ask every little thing, and want it to be expressed in Macaulean English,133 it cannot be done.

338 
Kingsland: Have not those “mineral atoms” been through a previous state of evolution in a previous Manvantara?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, nothing is lost, and they have been in thousands and millions of forms.

Kingsland: In this Manvantara they have reached the mineral kingdom.

Blavatsky: Yes, and they have been modeled and remodeled in the furnace of nature for millions and millions of years.

Kingsland: Can you tell us what will be the next stage of those “mineral atoms” in the next Manvantara?

Blavatsky: No, I don’t know anything at all about them.

Kingsland: Will they remain as “mineral atoms” all through Manvantara?

Blavatsky: I don’t know, they have got to evolute like everything else, to something else.

B. Keightley: I wish we could get at anything like a definite conception of what is meant in occultism by the term, atom.

Keightley: Question 10. Commentary (a). Do the six stages of consolidation here mentioned refer to six stages of matter on each plane?

Blavatsky: Yes they do, I suppose so. I wish you would meet on Tuesdays and try to ask some questions which should not be always going round and round the same thing. I believe all these questions I must have answered dozens and dozens of times. You all present the same questions in other forms, and it is an eternal squirrel’s work around the wheel. Now, if you go over what has been written, you will see it is so. It is impossible, if we want to have it from all aspects, we must have hundreds and hundreds of volumes.

B. Keightley: There is that question we have been on the verge

339 
of a number of times, as to the true conception from the point of view of esoteric philosophy of atoms. It really lies at the root of a great deal of the difficulties. That is what I thought we should have spent most of the time over, because it is a very wide subject.

Kingsland: What distinction is there from the occult standpoint between an atom and a molecule?

Blavatsky: I have told you, and I cannot say anymore. Molecule you know, and atom you don’t know. I cannot say anything more than what I have said.