
Keightley: Stanza 5, Sloka 3, p. 118. In speaking of the six directions of space, is the term direction used in its ordinary sense, or does it mean here a property or attribute of space?

Blavatsky: Simply figuratively, it means the macrocosm is divided in occult philosophy, just as the microcosm, that is to say, into six principles, synthesized by the seventh, and space here is not limited to any particular area.

Keightley: Then space is used in its widest metaphysical sense.

Blavatsky: In its widest metaphysical sense. I would speak manifested. Every time I say space without the word manifested, it means in its widest metaphysical sense; if I want to speak about space in this universe, I would say manifested space, or something like that, just to make some qualification.

Keightley: Question 8. Are the six directions the six rays of the Logos?

Blavatsky: Just as I have explained, just the same.

Keightley: Question 9, Sloka 4: “Fohat traces spiral lines to unite the six to the seventh.” Is there any special meaning in the word spiral, and is spiral action specially connected with Fohat?

Blavatsky: It is. Now in order that the neutral line, or zero point as Mr. Crookes calls it, and the centrifugal and centripetal must be made to run spirally, otherwise they would be entirely neutralized. I don’t know how otherwise to call it, the neutral point

358 
can be destroyed. Now, see, if you please, in this volume, Gods, Monads, and Atoms, page 550, where the Caduceus of Mercury is represented.135 Now, anyone who wants to know the explanation, let them read it. This spiral is represented in the Caduceus of Mercury. If you have a central point or a central line, for instance, like that (drawing), this must be the central line. As soon as you touch it, anything that is differentiated becomes undifferentiated again, and falls into the perfect Absolute. Then certainly, you must have the spirals go in such a way. One force goes in such a way (illustrating), and this is the Caduceus of Mercury which produces those miracles and marvels in the hands of [  ]. You look at this, and you will see that the healing powers and everything, that is what it means. And now Mr. Crookes finds—he speaks about number 8, perhaps you read it—he speaks about number 8, that he has found out that these forces go like that and make the figure 8, and the middle line is the central line. Therefore, there we are perfectly at one with ordinary science, of which I feel very proud. This is page 550.

Keightley: Then does that mean that by reason of a centrifugal and centripetal force, any force affected by that force must move in a spiral line?

Blavatsky: I believe it is a law that everything proceeds spirally, it never goes in straight lines. Science says something about gravity that goes on direct lines.

Mr. B. Keightley: That is one of the points I wanted to ask.

Blavatsky: I would never believe it. I can’t give you my reasons, but I, knowing occultism, say it is impossible. There is nothing in this world that can proceed otherwise than in spirals, or on such things as that, but never in the direct line, never.

Mr. B. Keightley: Then the same thing would be true as to the conception of the action of the two forces of attraction and repulsion. You would not think of them as acting in direct lines, but always in

359 
spirals. I don’t mean to say the effect, but as an abstract conception.

Blavatsky: Not only as an abstract conception, but I think you will find it in physical science that they must act something like that. They cannot act on direct lines.

Mr. B. Keightley: That is the effect they produce.

Blavatsky: Now look at the pranks that electricity plays with you. Put it on a sounding board. Does it do every straight line? A straight line is a thing unknown in the laws of Nature. Because that is why Pythagoras never would admit the straight line or number 2—because he says number 2 is not a creature that ought to exist in the Universe. We know the point which is not a point, but the point which is everywhere and nowhere, because it is absolute and universal, or it is the Triad or the Trinity.

Mr. B. Keightley: This is where the scientific idea comes in. They say the effects would be spiral. I think I would ask Mr. Kingsland if he agrees with this. The scientists would conceive as an abstract conception of the centripetal and centrifugal as acting in straight lines, combining together that would produce the spiral action—even in the abstract conception. I should think that occultism would stick to the spiral idea, if considered as abstractions.

Mr. Kingsland: They would not be conceived of as straight lines, and the two combined would produce the spiral.

Mr. B. Keightley: The abstract idea is, of course, the force acting in a straight line.

Mr. Kingsland: Oh, I see. In that sense, it is.

Mr. B. Keightley: Or any of the forces acting in a straight line. Suppose a force occupying a given point. It would be conceived to act upon any other point situated anywhere else in the room along the straight line joining the two points.

Mr. Kingsland: That is, for mathematical purposes.

360 
Blavatsky: Whether for that or for anything else, I don’t believe in it. That is all.

Keightley: Question 10. “If Fohat is the uniting power, while at the same time differentiation is going on, what is the disintegrating force which is at work; or is Fohat bipolar, i.e., does he produce both attraction and repulsion?”

Blavatsky: He does. I would like you to find me, as I said before, anything in this world that would not produce this bipolar action. Everything in creation is bipolar. Is there anyone very religious in the room, because I have to talk about personal God? Who of you is very religious?

Mr. ——: I am.

Blavatsky: You are not, I never would believe it, that is a blank denial. I want to say even your personal God is shown one moment infinite, and all kindness and mercy, the Creator and Preserver, and at another moment one of infinite anger, the destroyer and the annihilator. All this is bipolar, all this cannot be without, and if you take the God of your conception to be such a bipolar being, then how there can be any force, or anything that is not, I don’t know. You cannot have a force absolutely good or absolutely bad, there is no such thing in Nature, therefore they must be bipolar. You take a little speck of something you will find the two poles in it, the negative and the positive.

Keightley: Then does that mean to say that the action of Fohat on any substance is alternately first one, and then the other—first constructive, and then destructive?

Blavatsky: I told you that.Take the trinity of the Hindus. There is Brahmâ the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, Shiva the Destroyer, and all the three are one; and if you can conceive of one without the two others, then there remains no God but the flapdoodle, not good for anything. That which you call destruction is simply renovation, it is simply that. Well, I have explained it to you so many times: there

361 
is no such thing as Death, there is transformation. Now, if you sow a seed, as St. Paul says, in order—I forget how he says it.

Mr. B. Keightley: “In order that the seed may bear fruit it must fall into the ground and die.”136

Blavatsky: Yes, that is perfectly true, that is to say, it must be transformed, it will not die, because there is no such thing as anything that is destructible, because it simply passes into something else. This even science has discovered 20 or 30 years, it is the conservation of energy, and this is the greatest truth and the greatest thing they have discovered; really, the greatest truth that they ever will, because this is the law on which everything is based. The whole of occultism it is that nothing is lost and everything transformed. They found it 20 or 30 years ago. I advise you to take the books which existed 4 or 500 years ago, and there the conservation of energy is positively proven, because, it is said plainly. Or look in the Anugita, where it is said that nothing is lost, that Vishnu transforms himself and becomes [  ] in humanity, but it will become always Vishnu; that every atom becomes something else, but it is still the sole atom, it is still the same thing. I cannot repeat it, because I have not got a good memory, but if you read the several pages, I am sure you will find that the conservation of the energy is perfectly well described there, three of four hundred years ago. Let it be 100 years before science, I am perfectly satisfied it is proven that they knew it, and that they know it now. I don’t care whether it was many thousand years old. We speak about the manuscripts.

Keightley: Then is the idea of Vishnu, the Preserver in that Trinity, is that the idea of the conservation of energy?

Blavatsky: It is. He preserves everything, but he can preserve nothing without Shiva. Remember that Shiva must come and transform one thing into another, and he is, so to say, the helper of

362 
Vishnu, and every time that Vishnu is left in the lurch, as is shown in the Puranas, they call Shiva to his help, and it is Vishnu he must come and help to transform one thing into another.

Mr. B. Keightley: And if I remember aright, Brahmâ is always appealing to Vishnu for help.

Blavatsky: He cannot move or do anything without Vishnu. You may say what you like, but it is highly philosophical, I assure you.

Keightley: Sloka 4, continued. “They (the Lipika) say: ‘This is good.’” Question 11. What special meaning is this phrase of the Lipikas intended to convey?

Blavatsky: Why should not the Lipikas say this is good, when the Lord God in the first chapter of Genesis says it is good several times? And if he can say it, why cannot the Lipika say it?

Mr. B. Keightley: Certainly they can. It is not an objection. It shows that phrase has some special meaning, or it would {not} appear both in the old source from which you have taken the stanza and the Bible of the Jews. And the question is what is the special meaning?

Blavatsky: In the Bible, you know, there is as much philosophy as anything else, though half of it was thrown out. If you could have the whole Elohistic chapters you would see, if you please, what the philosophy is; but out of perhaps fourteen there remain now only one and a half, or something.

Mr. B. Keightley: The question is, what is the meaning?

Blavatsky: That this is good. What meaning do you want more? If it were bad they would not say a word, but they would proceed to correct their mistake and create it better.

Mr. Kingsland: But they might find out their mistake afterwards.

Blavatsky: Well, so did God also find his mistake afterwards, because he repented that he made man. Even a God repents, so why

363 
should not a Dhyan-Chohan?

Mr. Kingsland: Then it is only good, relatively?

Keightley: Is the “Chhaya-loka”—explained here as the shadowy world of primal form, or the intellectual—the same as what is called in the diagram on page 200 {of The Secret Doctrine} as the “Archetypal World”? Or is it what is there called the intellectual or creative world?

Blavatsky: The Archetypal World and the intellectual world; and of that, you can see in the Kabalah, it shows four planes. Take Mathers’ Kabalah,137 there it is shown. Don’t show it to me. I know it by heart. The Archetypal World may be compared to the thought of man {that} precedes action; this is the kind of individual Manas in the light of the universal intelligence. The artist conceives his idea first of all, before he begins to work, but before he can paint his picture he has to gather and prepare his materials in accordance with the plans that are in his mind. He stretches his canvas and grinds his colours. This is on the intellectual or creative world. Then he roughly sketches his idea on the canvas, and this may be compared to the presentment in the substantial or affirmative {formative} world. If you will follow there, you will see what I mean. He fills in all the details and the picture is ready. In the physical aspect there, they are the four planes. So it is in nature. I do not speak about the three higher, because they cannot be expressed in human language. The universal mind is above what they call the Divine ideation. This is a thing which cannot be expressed, but this Divine ideation falls, so to say, from the beginning; and when I say from the beginning, it means there is no beginning and no end; and the light of it will fall on the Archetypal World where are the antetypes or prototypes of everything; there would be nothing, not even this old carpet, if there

364 
was not an antetype or prototype. You understand my idea?

Miss Kenealy: Yes, I think that is very clear.

Keightley: Stanza 5, Sloka 5. Question 13. What are the influences proceeding from the four quarters of the world? Why are some, such as that from the East, injurious to life?

Blavatsky: Because it is; and do not ask me any more questions. They have been asking me a thousand times. It means North and East are good, West and South are bad. West is bad because the Egyptians and the Hindus and all the Chaldeans and the Phoenicians and everyone had the idea that the Devil came from the West; why it should be, I don’t know, because it is the presentment of western civilization in the present century. The Devil comes from the West in the Egyptian sacred books, in the Chaldean, in the Phoenician; in all he comes from the West. And everything that is good comes from the East, because the Sun is the regenerator and comes every day at the appointed time; and the Sun is our creator and friend and everything.

Keightley: If the evil influence is supposed to come from the West, and if the East is supposed to be good merely because the Sun, which is the regenerator, appears from there, what is the meaning of the Sun disappearing in the West? Is there any connection there? Is it merely an absence of good, or an actual presence of evil?

Blavatsky: It appears there, from whence comes darkness.

Keightley: But darkness does not come from the West.

Blavatsky: No, but light disappears in it, and therefore I suppose they made it bad, but they must have had some other occult influences. There is not a country that did not have West in their abomination positively, so that you must be mighty proud, all of you!

Mr. B. Keightley: Yet the islands of the blessed were always supposed to be in the West.

365 
Blavatsky: Geographically; but it is quite a different thing really. Just as it speaks of the east wind in London, and he asks me how is it the east wind is the most pernicious wind, and all good comes from the East. I say it is geographically. It may be so in your little island, but it is not so in space universal.

Keightley: Then what is the meaning of it in space?

Blavatsky: In space there is neither East, West, North, or South, if you take infinite space; but if you take a limited space, nature has so ordained it that everything evil comes from the West.

Keightley: Take the solar system. What is the meaning of it?

Blavatsky: I don’t know.

Keightley: Then what are the four corners?

Blavatsky: It is flapdoodle, because there are no corners in that which is spherical.

Mr. B. Keightley: I am afraid, Arch, your cross-examination won’t bring you much.

Blavatsky: I am not afraid of cross-examination, to tell you the truth.

Keightley: What is the meaning of the evil influence coming from the East {West}?
