
Blavatsky: Because evil influences are illnesses, and it appears they thought the Devil lived there.

Keightley: Why should it be the West and the South which are bad?

Blavatsky: From the South Pole come all the evils of the world; that is why you are not allowed to go to the South Pole, it is evil. To the North Pole you are not allowed to go because it is the land of the Gods. And if you went there you would be desecrated. Seriously speaking, there is some magnetism, something magnetic

366 
coming from the South and the West, that is a very bad magnetism, the magnetism of the emanations of the earth. It depends on the earth. Now, let us speak of the earth. Why is it that the Hindus tell you to sleep in a certain way, with your heads so and so, that the magnetism should pass through you in a certain direction? I have read several men {of} science who say that it is not at all a foolish idea. There is such a thing as terrestrial magnetism. When you have calculated where it comes from, then you will see there is some philosophy in the way the evil influences come from the West and the good ones from the East.

Keightley: But supposing, for instance, you placed your body in the direct currents of magnetism, which are supposed to proceed from the magnetic pole in the North? That is not in the actual axis of the earth.

Blavatsky: I never said it was. What do you want to know? What are you driving at?

Keightley: I wanted to find out where these magnetic bad influences come from, with regard to the earth.

Blavatsky: When you are older you will know more; you need not come and burden your young brain with that, because you could not retain it, and it would become like a sieve and it would run through.

Mr. Atkinson: Is it magnetic North, or the geographical North?

Blavatsky: No, magnetic.

Mr. Atkinson: Because they are opposite to the other.

Blavatsky: I tell you more. I have just had the honour of telling you we don’t believe in anything going in straight lines. Now, if you put 2 + 2 together, you will see what I mean; it does not go in straight lines. Therefore, you may say what you like, but unless you know occultism and all the points and everything you cannot know from where it comes and what is meant by it. There is simply the

367 
statement that it comes from such and such a thing. It is not meant for those who have {not} learnt occultism and who do not know there remained so many points into which the occultists divide the earth. And whilst you do not know it, how can you know how it passes, when it always goes either in a diagonal line or like that, in spirals, and never in a straight line? Therefore, it is extremely difficult to answer it; it is impossible.

Keightley: Then there is some special relation to the currents meant by the words East and West.

Blavatsky: Maybe there is, and maybe there is not. This is the sort of thing I am subjected to each Thursday. They will come and cross-examine me and pump out everything they can till Doomsday. I cannot say more than what I know.

Keightley: But you don’t say all you do know.

Blavatsky: That is a different thing; you have no right to ask it.

Keightley: Question 14. Have the four Maharajahs and the four elements a special terrestrial application, as well as a kosmic one?

Blavatsky: Except in karma, nothing at all. The four Maharajahs produce karmic effects, certainly, because there the Lipika Maharajah is a title they have, simply.

Keightley: What is the meaning of the four elements, then?

Blavatsky: In what respect?

Keightley: As related to those four Maharajahs.

Blavatsky: I don’t know what you are talking about. I didn’t see the last question. I don’t understand what you mean.

Keightley: We had better ask another time.

Blavatsky: I told you to take out the 15th.

368 
Keightley: That is all there is, then.

Blavatsky: I think that my fate or my karma is to live all my life surrounded by points of interrogation. Sometimes I have the nightmare, and it seems to me I am surrounded by points of negation.

Mr. ——: Points of admiration, I hope, as well.

Keightley: Well, you should not convert yourself into such a perpetual conundrum.

Blavatsky: I am a very simple-minded old woman. I come here and offer to teach you what I can. You accept, very well; I cannot teach you more than I can, you know.

Miss Kenealy: You say so much we want to know.

Blavatsky: You all are discreet. It is this immediately in the house {sic}, I am sorry Dr. Williams is not here. He puts questions beautifully.

Miss Kenealy: I think you are rather hard on us all.

Blavatsky: In the first place, you ask sometimes questions that trespass on forbidden ground. What is the use of my telling you one thing, and then shutting the door in your face? It will only be vexation of spirit, and it won’t teach you much. And I cannot say certain things. I tell all that is permitted me to give. It may be very foolish, very exclusive, very selfish. You may think what you like; I have not made the rules, I never made the laws. I have not so received it, nor shall I so impart. What I promised not to reveal I cannot, it is impossible.

Miss Kenealy: You know so much that what is very simple to you is often very hard to us.

Blavatsky: You see, you always continue to ask things that really I cannot give fully. So what is the use of saying it by bits?

369 
Mr. Kingsland: We have a dim perception there is something behind, so we keep pegging away.

Blavatsky: You cannot complain, because you have the explanation of many things.

Mr. Kingsland: I am speaking now generally, for the company.

Here the proceedings terminated.