

Keightley: Stanza 5, Sloka 6, Commentary. Question 1. How do the “Recorders of the Karmic ledger” make an impassible barrier between the Personal Ego and the Impersonal Self?

Blavatsky: Now, it seems to me it is very easy to understand that. I think that whoever understands the real nature of Nirvana, or even of the Christian Kingdom of Heaven, where it is said no one marries or is given in marriage, etc., ought to see very well what is the meaning of it. Because, what is Rupa? What is “Personal”? It is always something objective or material, and how can it then pass there beyond the point where everything is formless and Arupa? I think it is not given in symbolical language, but quite plainly. Now, I ask you: who is it that goes into the state of Devachan? Is it spirit, spirit-soul, or the monad loaded with spiritual consciousness and intelligence, or is it the lower principles of the personal man? Which is it that goes? You know perfectly well that the “Personal” was the Kama-loka, therefore they cannot go even on this plane. The principles remain to fade out in time and Kama-loka. The Lipika is said to circumscribe within the egg—which is the magnetic aura or {of?} manifested kosmos—man, animal or any concrete object in the universe, or those objects which have form. It is an allegory, and is stated in allegorical language, this enchanted ring or circle. No such ring exists in nature, but there exists the plane

372
of matter and spirit and consciousness. The Personal Self consists of a triangle in a square, man’s seven principles, of which only the upper Triangle is left; it cannot pass beyond the plane of even the primitive differentiated matter. Every atom of the seven principles—even the refulgence of Atma-Buddhi, for refulgence is an attribute and related to absoluteness—every atom must remain outside the portal of Nirvana. Alone divine ideation—the consciousness, the bearer of Absolute memory, of its personalities now merged into the one impersonal—can cross the threshold of the Laya point, which lies at the very gate of manifestation, of the human soul and mind in which facts and events, past, present and future, were alike fixed during their joint pilgrimage. There remains, as it is said at the dawn of the great day, but that which is left of the various foods in a copper vessel when the latter is well washed out and dried. This is a quotation from the book. But if this is so at its dawn, what shall we say becomes of the same soul and mind during the great day itself? Why, that which remains of the said copper vessel when it is melted—the memory alone. (You understand there is an enormous difference between Devachan and the Great Day, or that plane which only is reached during the Maha-Pralaya after all the cycle of existence is done away with.) How is it possible, then, that anything personal should come into it? We are unable to represent to ourselves such an entirely formless, atomless consciousness. During ecstasy we can imagine something approximate to the fact. We say the subject in this state of Samadhi is beyond his everyday world of limits and conditions, and now all is one motionless day and state for him. The past and the future being all in his present, his spirit is freed from the trammels and changes of the body. The highest and most spiritual parts of his Manas only are united to his own particular monad, which, like the monad of Leibniz, reflects that and is the whole universe in itself. The yogi, we say, is become the partaker of the wisdom and omniscience of the universal mind; but can we say that of the mind when it crosses beyond the Laya point? If you can, gentlemen of Oxford and Cambridge, I cannot, for I cannot speak the language of the gods, and if I could you would not much understand me, I suppose. There is a question, and for the life of me

373
I cannot make out what you mean by it. Who put such a question? What does it mean—to draw the line between the personal and the impersonal? You all of you ought to know it.

Mr. Kingsland: Is the state of Nirvana beyond the Laya point?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly; why, the Laya point is simply only for the planes of matter. This is the Laya point, as we call it, which goes beyond the material manifestation.

Mr. Kingsland: You would not say Devachan was beyond the Laya point?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly not. Devachan is one thing, and “the Great Day Be-With-Us” is another, for it is not simply planetary Pralaya, it is universal Pralaya.

Mr. Kingsland: We are to call that Nirvana, are we not?

Blavatsky: No, it is para Nirvana; para, which means Meta. 138

Mr. Kingsland: In the state of Samadhi, that is only Nirvana?

Blavatsky: It is simply Nirvana.

Mr. Kingsland: There is a certain amount of individuality attached to that.

Blavatsky: There is an individuality of spirit and soul, Atma- Buddhi.

Mr. Kingsland: You say the highest part of the Manas is assimilated with the Monad; you cannot say that of Nirvana.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, you cannot. I explained it afterwards there, further on, because there are many places where you say things which I cannot make out. I cannot make out how you, who know all about the personal remains in Kama-loka, don’t apply the same thing when you speak of the “Great Day Be-With-

374
Us.” I don’t mean at all about our partial, short, little lives here. That is quite a different thing. You see, if I had some of those who put the questions to be there when I answer them, it would be a different thing.

Keightley: It is said here the esoteric meaning of the first sentence is that those who have been called Lipikas and the recorders make an impassable barrier between the personal ego and the impersonal self.

Blavatsky: Certainly.

Mr. B. Keightley: The phrase almost looks as if it were the line of demarcation and division between the four principles and the three. I think there is a question after that on that.

Blavatsky: I think you have a very erroneous opinion about the three principles or the upper triangle. You don’t take into consideration, or make a difference, when we apply the seven principles on this plane as in man or in Devachan, or the same seven principles after the cycle of life is finished—which is a perfectly different thing, entirely different.

Mr. Kingsland: There is nothing in that Stanza to guide us to that.

Blavatsky: I could not write more than there is there.

Mr. B. Keightley: That is why these questions are asked.

Blavatsky: Don’t you see very well that the Lipika, “the Great Day Be-With-Us,” means when everything—when the cycle is finished? I am perfectly sure there must be some reference to it.

Mr. B. Keightley: That is plain; but then is there anything that can be spoken of as a “personal self” still remaining?

Blavatsky: I will tell you a thing which will settle the whole difficulty. This is what volume?

Mr. B. Keightley: The first.

375
Blavatsky: How is it called.

Mr. B. Keightley: Cosmogenesis.

Blavatsky: Then why should you make me speak of Anthropogenesis? The “personal self” is quite a different thing. This is a thing which has a relation, but no personal gods will have anything to do with it. It does not mean personal in the sense of our personality. It means objective individuality.

Mr. B. Keightley: Yes, but that is different from what the phrase would suggest.

Keightley: Question 2. Does “personal ego” here stand for the Upper Triad, Atma-Buddhi-Manas, or for the lower Quaternary?

Blavatsky: There it is. It would stand for all, if the principles of a still living man on Earth were meant; it stands for none in the case of the Lipika. It is said—I quote further—they circumscribe the triangle, the first one; the cube or quaternary, the second one; therefore all the seven contain in the triangle three, the quaternary or four within the circle. This is quite plain. No principles can cross the ring “pass not,” only the memory of these in the eternal divine ideation, which ideation itself from something manifested becomes the Absolute on that “Day Be-With-Us.” Therefore it is.

Keightley: Question 3. By “manifested plane of matter,” do you here mean the four lower planes of the diagram on page 200, i.e., the four planes of the globes of our chain, or only the lowest of the four, that of our Earth?

Blavatsky: I mean what I say. Nothing manifested or having form or name or number can cross beyond the ring which divides the immutable {mutable} and the manifested from the ever-present and immutable. Now, do put this into your wise heads, my dear children. There is the difference between the immutable {mutable} and the manifested, and the ever-present and the immutable; and you cannot cross this line and you cannot—it is impossible—nothing that is within this domain can pass into the other, the beyond. It is

376
impossible, at least in our philosophy; I don’t know how it is in your conceptions, but in our philosophy, it is impossible. Where does our miserable atom of dirt, which gossipy conceit called the Earth, stand, once the Pralaya and universal destroyer and disappearance of the whole universe—the ideal as much as the physical—is concerned? How can I mean the Earth in one breath with absoluteness? Is it not said of the abstract elements on page 130 (Which, please, look up.) that even they, when they return into their primal element, or the one and secondless, can never cross beyond the Laya or zero point? Isn’t it as plain as can be? Why do you torture me, then? There are seven meanings to every symbol. Astronomically, the ring “Pass- Not” means one thing, and metaphysically, quite another.

Keightley: You state here—you quote from the Visishtadvaita Catechism139 (Reads from The Secret Doctrine, page 132.) Question 4. Can you explain the esoteric meaning of the sentence: “Then it goes through a dark spot in the Sun”?

Blavatsky: Now, do you know what a Visishtadvaita is? They believe in a personal, in a personal God, and they are dualists. They are Vedantins, but they have got no right to the name of Vedantins. There are three sects among the Vedantins: the Dvaita dualists, the Visishtadvaita, which are more than dualists, and the Advaita, who are humanitarian, so to say, who believe only in one science. Therefore, I answer to this that you had better ask the [  ], because I don’t understand what it means. The “dark spot in the Sun” must be on a par with the Angel standing on the Sun. I could never understand what was meant. I even took the trouble of writing to the Pundit himself,140 and I commissioned Harte to ask him what it meant, and he could not tell me; so that what can I do?

Mr. B. Keightley: Then you cannot blame us for asking the question.

377
Blavatsky: I cannot, I don’t know myself what it means. I have a dim idea, because for them the Sun is that Parabrahm; they don’t know any better; and I do think, you know, that it means the heart of the Sun.

Keightley: Does it correspond at all with the point in the circle?

Blavatsky: I quote that simply to show the different systems in the Hindus. I don’t blame you. I simply quote it to show what it says. Now comes a pretty question—number 5!

Keightley: Question 5, page 135. Can you tell us anything more as to the esoteric meaning of the 3,000 cycles of existence?

Blavatsky: Oh, immediately! Yes, of course! In the first place, I am not a mathematician—I say there it is perfectly impossible for me to go into figures. Secondly, you know perfectly well, as Mr. Sinnett has written already in his Esoteric Buddhism, that the powers that be and who have in their pockets the secret wisdom don’t like to go into figures; they never do. The 3,000 cycles may mean any number of figures; it all depends upon the duration of each 3,000 cycles, which is, in short, the period of the whole Manvantara.

Keightley: Maha-Manvantara or minor?

Blavatsky: No, Manvantara; that is to say, when the seven rounds are accomplished.

Keightley: But is there any meaning attached to the idea of 3,000?

Blavatsky: I don’t know; it may be.

Keightley: I am not asking the question numerically, but what is the idea?

Blavatsky: They say in many places 3,000; it has a Devachanic meaning, that is all. Every defunct who goes and crosses the Nile in the boat (You remember that ceremony.) is Osirified, he becomes his

378
own spirit, and the spirit goes into the field of Aanroo. That is what it means.

Keightley: Question 6. Stanza 6, Sloka 1 (page 138). Can you further amplify this explanation as to the four kinds of Vach?

Blavatsky: In other words, can you analyze Subba Row’s two lectures and once that it is published, to have all the blessed [  ] on my head. It is a quotation from his lectures in the [  ], he divides [  ] and speaks of four forms, as a Vedantin who lays stress on the four-faced Brahmâ, the one who manifests on our plane and who is identical with Tetragrammaton also; if not four-faced, then the four numbered. He divided Vach into seven parts, and speaks of the seven faces of our Avalokite[vara, that is to say, the seven forces manifested in nature. Our Vach is the female Logos. Now read Vishnu {Purana}; and I need not ask you, because I know you have read this several times. Or again, in Manu, or in any other work in which Vach is mentioned, and you will find that Brahmâ had divided himself into two persons, male and female, and they created the seven Manus. Now this is the exoteric version of the esoteric, or that which I have taught you many times. We are Vedantin, so far that we maintain seven, Vach being the female aspect of the seven logos {i}. You must understand what it means. They are all androgynous. Even the first one, ethereal as he may be, might be made out of nothingness, but still he is androgynous—he has the feminine aspect in him, and because he emanates the second logos. Now the following question will give you more.

Keightley: Question 7. In speaking of the “Seven Sons of Light and Life” as being beyond the Laya centres, do you refer only to what may be termed the “relative” Laya centres which limit our solar system? For the term Laya centre seems usually to be used of the absolute limit of all differentiation.

Blavatsky: It is so, indeed, in the limit of differentiation in the manifested kosmos. What is meant may be absolute darkness for us, but certainly it can be neither differentiation nor Laya, as we

379
conceive of them, in that beyond. When I speak of the “Seven Suns of Light and Life” as being beyond the Laya centres, it only means this: they are subject neither to Laya nor differentiation—during the cycle of their life, at any rate, which lasts a Maha-Manvantara. If you had only remembered the order in which the Dhyan-Chohans emanate, or theogony, which is there explained in many places, you would not have asked the question. I thought you knew by this time that logos number one radiated seven primeval rays, which are as one, and are called the septenary robe of destiny; and that from that one is ultimately born logos number three, whose seven rays become the kosmic builders and whose aggregate is Fohat. How, then, can the sons of Light and Life, the septenary robe of immutable destiny, be otherwise than beyond the Laya centres? It is just what I had the pleasure of explaining to our dear President, Mr. Kingsland. I think it is very conceivable, that. You cannot take Laya as referring to anything but matter, manifested matter, differentiation, even finite manifested differentiation, and beyond this Laya point, which is the Zero point of matter, is matter which never differentiates, and nothing. It is not that it is a question of heat or anything, it is simply the within—how shall we explain this—as I have been explaining to you many times. Everyone of them is endless, shoreless, limitless, and yet there are seven. Well, there is a riddle for you! If not a mathematical one, it is not a physical one, and yet I suppose everyone ought to try and conceive of that—that it is not a question of right, left, up, top, below, or beneath. It is simply a question of the state of matter or state of consciousness. Matter is everywhere, because matter and spirit are one, but the Laya point, or beyond the Laya point, you cannot call that matter nor spirit; it is neither matter nor spirit, it is both and nothing.

Mr. B. Keightley: Then, really, that looks as if the Laya point would divide the four planes which you may call more especially manifested—the planes of the globe and solar system, and so on—from the three upper planes of which we have been speaking.

Blavatsky: They do not. The three planes and the four are just

380
in one Cosmos as the seven principles are in you; but it is simply this: if we cannot understand or realize that we have these three principles in us, such as the higher intelligences, or Manas, and Buddhi, the spiritual soul, and Atma, the soul that is the synthesis—if we cannot realize this, how can you pretend to go and conceive that which is perfectly inconceivable for human intellect, the three higher intelligences? That is why I only give the four, because they represent the planes on which our planetary chain is, but I can’t go beyond, because it would be perfectly incomprehensible; and moreover my knowledge of the English language would not tell me, nor any language, for I could not explain it.

Mr. Kingsland: You must look upon the three higher principles as differentiations of the Absolute one, whereas beyond the Laya point you have no differentiation whatever.

Blavatsky: That is just what it is.

Mr. B. Keightley: But you have the seven hierarchies.

Blavatsky: You have no seven. All is one after that.

Mr. B. Keightley: It was seeing the phrase used—“the Seven Sons of Light.”

Blavatsky: Never mind what we use; we have a language to say many things, and we cannot say more than what the philosophy has evoluted. Try to understand it, if you please, that there are no differentiations, no spirit, nothing, it is the Absolute darkness for us. The highest Dhyan-Chohans could not tell you any more than could Mr. Herbert Spencer. It is a thing on which human intellect cannot speculate. It is perfectly ridiculous and absurd for us stupid men and women to go and speculate upon such a thing as that. When I speak of stupid men and women, I include all those who possess the highest intellects in the world.

Mr. Kingsland: At the same time, do you not speak relatively of a Laya point of matter beyond which there are {no} differentiations?

381
Blavatsky: No, no.

Mr. Kingsland: Relatively.
