
Blavatsky: Look here. Try to understand me. We have seven planes of matter. On each of these planes there are seven again, and each has its Laya point. When we are on our plane, there is a Laya point which is the seventh of our plane; but when you have gone beyond those seven planes or seven divine ideations, as they are called sometimes, then there is nothing. You cannot speculate, because there, where there is nothing to grasp at, you cannot conceive of it; it is a perfect impossibility.

Mr. Kingsland: That is exactly what I meant, that there are certain relative Laya points.

Blavatsky: Yes, but those that come from the first Logos are beyond any Laya point, because they do not belong yet to differentiated kosmos. They call it the septenary robe of destiny; I don’t know why it is, but it is so. Mind you, though they are seven they are one; they are, so to say, the privations, the ideations of the seven that will be, of the second Logos—those that will be the seven from which will emanate the seven forces of nature. Please do ask me if you don’t understand something, because I want to begin very seriously all these instructions.

Keightley: (Reads from The Secret Doctrine, page 138.) Question 8. Does Fohat stand in the same relation to the Hierarchy of Seven that Mayavi–rupa does to an adept, i.e., as the intelligent, formless, active thought power or energy?

Blavatsky: Whoever put the question has put an excellent definition. It is perfectly as you say. Who of you evoluted this? Let me give him the laurel wreath.

Mr. B. Keightley: It was Arch.

Blavatsky: Well, for once I must pay you the compliment; it is perfectly well defined, it is the Mayavi–rupa. You cannot make

382
a better illustration. (After a pause.) Now comes again a flapdoodle.

Keightley: Question 9. Sloka 3, page 140. After Maha-Pralaya or any of the lesser Pralayas, does “Matter” remain in status quo of progress, to re-emerge in Manvantara and take up differentiation and evolution at a corresponding point to where it was left at Pralaya?

Blavatsky: Matter remains status quo, that is to say, in the form it is found in at the hour of Pralaya, only with regard to the spheres or globes of our chain. Then the globe, going into obscuration (As Mr. Sinnett perfectly calls it, a name which has been given to him.), becomes, in the words of a Master, like a huge whale or mammoth caught in the masses of ice, and frozen. The moment Pralaya catches it, it remains status quo, everything. Even if a man happens not to be dead, he will remain just as he is. But now listen. Otherwise, and at the hour of any other Pralaya, save this planetary one in the solar Pralaya, for instance, when our Sun goes into sleep, the matter of that system which is to die and go out of existence is scattered in space to form other forms in other systems. Every atom or molecule of it has its Karma and its destiny, and everyone has worked out his way, unconsciously, or according to the little intelligence it has; or it will, if you please, go into other and higher systems when there begins the new Manvantara. But the planetary Manvantara is the only one where everything remains status quo. There are superb things in some Sanskrit books, the description of it: when the Pralaya is near, when you have to expect it, and all kinds of kosmic phenomena—most magnificent. I quote a passage of it, but it is a long thing of about 17 or 18 pages.

Mr. Gardner: Is it in the Purana?

Blavatsky: It is not in the Puranas; it is in a philosophical book by one of those Rishis. I have had it here, but I don’t know what has been done with it. I had one of the great pundits to translate it for me word for word, and I was for about two weeks putting it down, because it is a magnificent thing. I wanted to have it in The Theosophist.

383
Mr. Gardner: Do animals exhibit any peculiarities?

Blavatsky: There are not many animals left. There are what they call the Zishta that remain, the seeds; they say they are great adepts who become Manu when the time comes, when the obscuration is ended and this wave of life again reaches that particular globe or planet, then they say they are the seed of life, the seed Manus.

Mr. Kingsland: Then the planet that is in obscuration will still be visible from other planets.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, certainly; we see many dead planets.

Mr. Kingsland: The term obscuration gives us some idea, under the impression that in obscuration it would not be visible.

Blavatsky: It means from the standpoint of that which is on it, and not others.

A Lady: Is not the Moon in obscuration?

Blavatsky: No, it is not. The Moon is perfectly dead as a doornail.

Mr. Holt: Don’t we understand obscuration by this paralytic condition?

Blavatsky: It is there that they are not asleep. “Not dead but sleeping.”

Mr. Gardner: Suspended animation.

Keightley: There seem to be three stages then. There is obscuration, death, and dissolution.

Blavatsky: Yes.

Keightley: Progress towards destruction. There is the one you point out as the frozen state of paralysis; then there is the total death, like the Moon; finally the solar death, when the whole thing

384
bursts up and goes on.

Blavatsky: But there are seven states, if you take not only planets but everything there is on them. Take sleep and take the trance state and take the yogi hibernation—for 40 or 50 days buried and then coming into life.

Keightley: Do the states of the planets correspond?

Blavatsky: Everything corresponds. There is nothing that happens to man that does not happen to everything else.

Keightley: Then what state does that sort of paralysis correspond to?

Blavatsky: Oh! This is not for you. Give your question. Don’t you begin jumping.

Mr. Gardner: Can you tell us any of the planets that are in obscuration?

Blavatsky: We will tell you another day when you put the question. As the question is not there, I won’t. Kindly learn a little more method.

Mr. B. Keightley: I think it is stated somewhere in Esoteric Buddhism. I think Mars is just emerging from obscuration and Venus is just passing into it. I don’t remember exactly.

Keightley: Page 143. Can you give us a short sketch of “The Life and Adventures of an Atom?”

Blavatsky: That is the question I was expecting! “Can you give us a short sketch of the Life and Adventures of an Atom?” No, but I offer you two questions instead. Now you have to answer them. Which do you believe is larger, your body or that of the whole kosmos? You will say, of course, it is the kosmos.

Keightley: Well, wait a moment.

Blavatsky: And secondly, which of you has a greater number

385
of atoms or molecules, you, or that kosmos? Choose.

Mr. Holt: I should say exactly the same number.

Blavatsky: Do you? And how about men who are smaller and men who are a great deal bigger?

Mr. Holt: It is a matter of the size of the atoms.

Mr. B. Keightley: No, the distance between the atoms, that is, from the scientific point of view.

Blavatsky: Oh! But we are anti-scientists here.

Keightley: A man is commensurate with the whole of the kosmos.

Blavatsky: I will tell you why I put this question. Now, supposing in view of the hopelessness of the task you offer me, and while I confess myself incapable of enlightening you with a sketch of the life and adventures of every atom, I seek to give you a biography of one of your personal atoms. Let us see now: am I generous and kind, that I consent to give you the life and adventures of only one?

Keightley: I asked for one.

Blavatsky: Now we will see if it is possible. How many years will it take me, do you think, to give you an accurate statement even about that one atom? For occult science teaches that from the moment of birth to that of death (And after death still more so.) every atom, or let us say particle, rather, alters with every seventh fraction of something far less than a second; that it shifts its place, and proteus-like travels incessantly in the same direction as the blood, externally and internally, night and day. Now you are 28, 29, or how old are you? Thirty, let us say. Then let us say, if you please, that I will take an atom of your body, and from the moment of your birth I will begin giving you the life and adventures of that blessed atom in all its transformations, in all its gyrations, in all its metempsychosis. How long will it take me, gentlemen mathematicians? Tell me how much.

386
Count and I will give it.

Keightley: Roughly, though; a short sketch.

Blavatsky: Go to bed!

Mr. Kingsland: If you ask a person to give a sketch of their life and history, you don’t expect them to give the history of what they did every day of their time.

Blavatsky: An atom is not a man, an atom does not get into flirtations, and courtship and marriage, and pass through the Bankruptcy Court, and become a magistrate, and the Lord Mayor; nothing of the kind. An atom is a very well-behaved being, and what one atom does almost every other atom does. There are certain little variations, but it is nothing. But to come and tell you what I mean there, and give the life and adventures of an atom—which means, simply an impossibility. Because I said a chemist would be astounded and take it for the biggest nonsense for an alchemist to give him the life and adventures of an atom; and yet he comes and puts this question. Really and seriously, all of you, you must allow a margin, you must leave some possibility for a poor author to exercise his imagination.

Mr. Kingsland: We must have something to hang a discourse on.

Blavatsky: Oh, if it is only pegs you want, that is another thing.

Mr. B. Keightley: That question of atoms is consistently cropping up in The Secret Doctrine.

Blavatsky: It does, and I had the honour of telling you what I meant by atoms, that I used them in that sense of cosmogenesis. I said they were geometrical and mathematical points.

Mr. B. Keightley: Haven’t you got something definite in your mind, when you write that?

Blavatsky: There are very many things I may have in my

387
mind, and which I don’t like to make public. There may be such.

Mr. Kingsland: I think Mr. Holt ought to tell us why he says there are the same number of atoms in the body as in Cosmos.

Mr. Holt: I was regarding the Earth and the solar system as but an atom; it was relatively. Each system might be regarded as but an atom of the whole Cosmos, just as we are but atoms of our permanent Earth with respect to our bodies.

Mr. Kingsland: Do you say every individual is an atom?

Mr. Holt: The mathematical idea of the atom is the least conceivable, not the least demonstrable—so that you see I am not begging the question. We may conceive the great and the small, and they are the same size in the noumenal. Are they not?

Mr. Kingsland: But when you compare the individual Cosmos, you are not working on that plane, you are working on the plane of manifestation.

Mr. Holt: I use it in that sense, but it was not until HPB gave us her definition of the atom that I thoroughly understood what was intended. If it is the mathematical atom, then I say just as many, I mean metaphysically.

Mr. B. Keightley: The peculiarity of the mathematical point definition is, it has not got a size at all, neither bigness or smallness.

Mr. Holt: Therefore, it may be all or it may be nothing, so that is really why I said the man has so many atoms.

Blavatsky: You said it simply kabalistically, as “the microcosm of the macrocosm.”

Keightley: Question 11, footnote, {See Secret Doctrine, I:143†, implies} “Force is a state of matter.” Are forces atomic and molecular, though supersensuous? The phrase used appears to imply Occultists make no distinction between force and matter. Is this the case? Please enlarge and explain.

388
Blavatsky: Still I say force as manifested on this plane is a state of matter. What would you call radiant matter, if not a state of matter? But the energy which produces the state of matter is perfectly the same as force. Call it force or energy, we consider it as a state of matter on this plane, for it cannot act without matter being present, and these two cannot be diverse. What force is on the other plane is quite a different thing, but I mean on this one, I say it is an electric state, that is what I say. Every force that is produced, to whatever it is applied, we call an electric force. It is a function of the whole universal electric ocean which acts. Do you understand my meaning?
