
Blavatsky: It does most decidedly. One principle goes out after another from the dying planet and generates a globe, as each principle generates another, except the physical body; for both are the productions of the Lunar Kama-rupa. Now that which I mean to

397
say is, it means our planetary chain. And in Esoteric Buddhism, you will find that this wave of life, as he calls it, as it passes on, and when one is formed, then the other begins forming; and then one goes into obscuration, and they go one after the other. They emanate, because, if you have to believe what the occult sciences teach, namely, that our Earth is a production of the Moon that is a little bit of mud—well, it is a question of preference. But if you have to believe the occult doctrine, then every principle goes one after the other. There comes the first principle, that lives {leaves} when the Moon begins dying, which produces globe A; then the other can produce globe B, and so on. It goes in a round, the middle one being the Lunar Kama-rupa, that is to say, the seat of material things.

Mr. B. Keightley: You see the diagram as it is drawn; you remember how it is, the two chains side by side. Then A projects its principles into A of the Earth chain, but the phrase used there in the commentary seems to suggest that instead of going that way, that A being established, then from A came the next planet on our chain B and A of its own plane.

Blavatsky: A produces A, B produces B, and so on.

Mr. B. Keightley: The words of the Stanza seem to suggest that A produces B.

Blavatsky: It must have been done by some of you six or seven editors.

Mr. B. Keightley: It is the words of the Stanzas, but there are no alterations made. It looks as if in English it meant each wheel of a succeeding wheel.

Blavatsky: Don’t be so very fine. I may give it, and then you can change it if you like.

Mr. B. Keightley: It was only to find out whether anything wanted explaining.

Blavatsky: No; one wheel it means, one globe giving birth

398
to the other.

Mr. B. Keightley: In two successive chains?

Keightley: Question 13, page 145. With reference to what was said last Thursday about nebulæ being collectively Fohatic affinity, what is the relation of a Laya centre to such nebulæ?

Blavatsky: Here comes Laya centre again. None whatever. A Laya point is a little absoluteness of its own and can have no relations to differentiated things, so far as I know. It is a state in a point, moreover. It is neither a point nor a triangle nor any geometrical figure at all. It is simply called the Laya point to show the Laya state. It is a state—Laya—and not at all anything that can be indicated by any geometrical figure whatever.

Keightley: Question 14, “…four and one Tsan (fraction) revealed—two and one half concealed…” Is there a distinctive separation into two parts of manifestation of the fifth element, corresponding to the separation of the Higher from Lower Manas?

Blavatsky: Yes there is. But you know this is a very abstruse question, in which you cannot go tonight. This is a thing which certainly it is, because if there is any analogy in nature it must be so; but we certainly cannot go into it tonight.

Mr. ——: Were the occultists aware that there were eight planets?

Blavatsky: They knew a great deal more. They simply speak about seven planets. They took the Earth and the Sun as substitutes, because they had planets of which our science now has vaguely and dimly an idea. There is one of the most sacred planets, the second one, which corresponded {to} that body which they take Mercury for. And it is the one between Mercury and the Sun.

Mr. ——: Is there one there?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly there is, and they searched for it, and they suspected it, and they cannot find it.

399
Mr. ——: That is to say, it is not visible to the physical sight.

Blavatsky: It is visible, but it is in its last obscuration. It will be seen from Mercury. It will be a moon, when there will be some other planet produced. There are figures for it.

Mr. Gardner: By what name was it known?

Blavatsky: Oh, you would like to know it! Ask your instructor. I don’t know it, so I cannot tell you. They wanted to call it Vulcan; they say that they suspected. I don’t know what some of them said; others deny it.

Mr. Gardner: When the eclipse came?

Blavatsky: They thought there was something. I don’t think it is anything.

Mr. ——: Does that make it invisible, being in obscuration?

Blavatsky: It may come again, you understand, but it is in its last brightness. It is as the Moon was before, because the Moon was far less visible than it is now. Now it vampirizes the Earth, but before it didn’t have to vampirize anything; and it was in its last degree of consumption.

Mr. Holt: I don’t think its luminosity would have anything to do with its visibility to this Earth. The darker it were the better for us, because we should see it against the Sun’s disc.

Mr. B. Keightley: But they do fancy they caught a glimpse of it during the eclipse.

Mr. Gardner: Do you say the Moon vampirizes on us?

Blavatsky: Certainly, it does. All the moons and all the parents vampirize on their children in this space.

Mr. Gardner: Saturn’s moon and Jupiter’s too?

Blavatsky: They are all the same; no altruism among them; It

400
is the survival of the fittest in nature. It is only men who ought not to have this.

Mr. ——: Have you any theory as to the numerous minor planets?

Mr. B. Keightley: 178 or more of them. Planetoi {Planetoids?}, it is.

Blavatsky: There is not the smallest star that is not personified. You may believe how many when even exoterically they give 330 million of gods, and every one of these gods, is a star—a visible star or planet.

Mr. B. Keightley: And has a story.

Blavatsky: Now the astronomers have not got more than 60,000 stars.

Mr. B. Keightley: They have got some millions.

Mr. Holt: Taking the zodiac, 218,000,000.

Blavatsky: And the Hindus have 330,000,000, and every one of them has its history and its place and space.

Mr. Kingsland: Has its life and adventures.

Blavatsky: Yes; I bring it in, because every god is connected with a star, that is why. Oh, they knew all; I can assure you they are a wonderful people. Why is it that they knew perfectly, without any telescopes or instruments, the seven Pleiades—the seventh sister which now has disappeared, and you can hardly see it with the best telescope? And they knew it perfectly, and it had not disappeared in their day. Therefore calculate how many thousand years they must have had this astronomers’ knowledge.

Mr. B. Keightley: Their tables for the Moon’s motion, which have been absolutely proved to have been obtained by independent data, are more accurate than the very best modern tables.

Blavatsky: Surely, it is wonderful, and they have no telescopes. What had they? The most rudimentary things, yet see how they

401
knew it, because in the temples and the hierophants, the twice-born, they had all the things a thousand times better than we have now; but they don’t speak of it; it is gone. It was sacred with them. They did not make a speculation of it simply on the material plane, as they do here. It was their religion, their most sacred doctrine. Certainly they did not give it to the hoi polloi.

Mr. Holt: They would not have needed telescopes to see these things. Could not they have seen them astrally?

Blavatsky: In the Pleiades, they disappeared. You cannot see them now without a telescope.

Mr. Holt: It has its astral counterpart. It is double. Then they could see.

Blavatsky: They can see not only that, they had their seers, but they had astronomers likewise.

Mr. Gardner: They had their instruments, as well.

Blavatsky: They are what Proctor141 writes about of the knowledge of the Chaldeans and the Egyptians.

Mr. Gardner: Did they have any force like Keely’s force?

Blavatsky: That is not much. I suppose every yogi could produce Keely’s force.

Mr. B. Keightley: There is not anything well-confirmed about this idea. I think it is flapdoodle. He might use it in some way to increase the power of perception, but I don’t see how he can use his vibrating ether as a telescope. Somebody asserted that Keely could make use of his vibratory forces as a telescope.

Keightley: Hartmann142 said he had seen it. He said that he could just be looking down the tube after reflecting this force or

402
getting it in some way on to it, he could make a bacillus the size of an orange.

Mr. Gardner: What magnitude is that?

Keightley: I don’t know how many thousandth parts of an inch it measures, I mean the microscope. If you can get Keely’s power to magnify that sort of size, you can surely apply the same principle to a telescope.

Mr. B. Keightley: Yes, if you can do it.

Mr. Holt: I don’t see the application of it.

Keightley: Hartmann said he had seen it.

Blavatsky: He says only one thing that has attracted your attention, and he says one thing which sounds very much like our theory, only he expresses it in other words. He says that the Sun is a dead planet. I say that it looks very much like that that we say. The Sun, nobody has ever seen; it is simply the shadow of the real Sun, which is perfectly invisible and certainly in this sense, you can call it dead. You have the rays of light, and the shadow is strong.

Mr. ——: It throws up enormous fountains of molten matter.

Blavatsky: He gives his reason for it, and I say that which occultism teaches. I say, it is not the Sun we see; we see the shadow, the screen, the phantom; the real Sun is not seen at all.

The proceedings here closed.

