
Keightley: Question 6. What class or classes of intelligences are included here under the term “Nature”?

Blavatsky: The four lower classes or principles, as I have just said. There is no need to repeat it.

Keightley: Question 7. “The Chhayas of the Lunar Pitris.” What is a Chhaya?

Blavatsky: Did I not tell you 29,000 times, Chhaya is a Sanskrit word, meaning shadow, or image, or what we call astral body? [  ] {Sañjña},167 the wife of Surya, the Sun, becoming tired of the too ardent love of her husband, left him her handmaiden, Chhaya, that is to say, her own astral image, or body, and took herself off to the jungles to become a yogi. So runs the tradition. Somehow or other, as Vishnu Purana narrates, the Sun, deceived by the likeness, managed to have two children from this astral body—so it is stated in Vishnu Purana—and that is the origin of Chhaya, the astral body.

Keightley: Question 8. Has a planet an individuality as a man has an Ego?

Blavatsky: It has. Its ruling spirit, or governor, as it is called in Pimander,168 is self-conscious. Any questions to that?

Mr. Kingsland: That has been partially answered before.

479 
Keightley: Question 9. Is there any analogy between the Monad of man and the vital essence of a planet?

Blavatsky: You do offer very funny questions! Certainly not. There is an analogy—I would call it a perfect correspondence—between the Monad of a man and the ruling spirit or governor of a spirit {planet}. But the vital essence of that planet corresponds to the vital essence of man, therefore to the Kama-rupa. For Prana (or life) has, strictly speaking, two vehicles, as Manas is double: Linga- sarira, or astral body, is the vehicle of the life principle, or spirit life; while Kama-rupa is the vehicle of the physical or material essence. In other words, the three higher principles of the septenary of Prana reside in the astral body, while the four lower principles have their seat in Kama-rupa. You have learnt something new tonight, because I discovered, to my great surprise, that Mr. Bert Keightley did not know what I meant, that Kama-rupa was the vehicle of the life essence and that there was a difference between it and Prana, which has seven principles. Therefore, as Kama-rupa is the vehicle of the grossest of that form, that Prana the astral body has got is a vehicle of the spirit of the life principle, because it is connected with the higher principles of the triad and not with the quaternary.

Mr. Kingsland: That is certainly a new idea.

Blavatsky: I did not know it was a new idea at all.

Keightley: Nobody had ever stated it in any theosophical work.

Blavatsky: My dear sirs, I say to all you, “Not guilty,” who do not live in the house; but those who live in the house and from morning to night speak and live and have their being in occultism ought to know it. I absolve everyone who does not live here, but not Mr. Bertram Keightley, because he ought to know.

Mr. Kingsland: It has not been done in any published work so far.

Blavatsky: My dear sir, it was said to Mr. Sinnett before he wrote Esoteric Buddhism (Whether he put it there, I don’t know.),

480 
but it is a thing which is an axiom, and it has been put, I am perfectly sure, in The Theosophist—that there is not a thing in nature which has not got its two poles and its seven principles. That is one of the fundamental axioms of the occult sciences and the esoteric doctrines, that every blessed thing has its seven principles and its polarity.

Mr. Kingsland: If you can divide each principle into seven you get 49, which is confusing.

Mr. ——: And then divide each of those 49 into seven.

Mr. Mead: One understands that everything is subdivisible into sevens like that, but that Prana principle having two vehicles is difficult to follow.

Blavatsky: Prana in man has two vehicles because there is a spiritual life and there is a material, physical life. Now, that which is in the Kama-rupa is the grossest sub-principle, so to say, and all that, but that which is in the astral body is the pure spiritual life. Now, if you do not understand this, how will you understand the 49 fires of occultism? If you don’t understand them, you are simply a flapdoodle, and he who wants to be a flapdoodle, let him neglect the 49 fires. That is all I can tell you. The astral body being the shadow or the image of man is in direct communication with the higher principles, whereas Kama-rupa is the animal. It is the seat of everything animal.

Keightley: If you look at the diagram of the planet in the human principles which is given a few pages back, you will find you get exactly the explanation of the two vehicles.

Blavatsky: You cannot expect me to give everything; something must be left to the intuition and to human intelligence. If I had written everything I would have had to make 25 volumes and it would not have been enough. I told you hundreds of times, stick to analogy here.

Keightley: If you look at page 153 {of volume 1 of The Secret Doctrine}, you get it. That diagram gives the key if you make that

481 
substitution, if you put it in its proper order.

Blavatsky: I have remarked you must not number them. The number “one” is that principle which is predominant in man. Now, if you happen to have your fourth principle predominant, it will be the first. They want to have everything put straight for them. They won’t shake their own brains.

Keightley: Question 10, page 192: “The holy youths refused to multiply…” If these “sons” could once refuse to inhabit the Chhaya-rupas, why could they not continue to refuse? And what was the necessity which finally compelled them to incarnate in even less pure rupas?

Blavatsky: Because they were not independent Englishmen, but simply poor celestial beings, and they were not as obstinate as your nation is. And what prevented them was Karma. Not a single word more can I say. Let us not forget that there is a limit to the freedom of action of every differentiated being in the whole universe. Karma, being the absolute adjusting law, whether in heaven or on earth, says to the proud waves: “So far shalt thou go and no farther.” If it says this to the waves, it says it to the angels, and anything you like. It is Karma, and they cannot go against Karma. It is the whole thing. They may kick as much as they like, but they have to do it. Instead of pure and wholesome bodies, they had to enter into defiled bodies.

Mr. Mead: Then free will is always circumscribed?

Mr. ——: Did these beings that refused to incarnate know they were doing wrong?

Blavatsky: I suppose they did, but it was disagreeable to imprison themselves into those bodies once more, and they delayed and delayed. And if you read The Secret Doctrine, you will see what occurred.

Mr. ——: How did the law of Karma act on them?

482 
Blavatsky: It acts on everything that is differentiated under the Sun—not our Sun, but the spiritual Sun.

Keightley: All these classes and hierarchies of divine beings are these evolutions of previous Manvantaras, and they have an infinite line of Karma behind them.

Blavatsky: They do not come created by anything or make a simultaneous appearance with the universe.

Keightley: Question 11, page 193: You say that the Jewish Kabbalists argue “that no Spirit could belong to the divine hierarchy unless Ruach (Spirit) was united to Nephesh (living soul).” That is to say that “it is necessary for each ego to attain full self-consciousness as a human, i.e., conscious being.”

Blavatsky: They do belong to the divine hierarchy, because they had been men in the preceding Manvantara. Now, whether it was on this earth or on other earths, I do not know; never mind they were men or human beings. I do not know whether they had two arms and two legs and a head, but they were Manus—thinking beings. As the sons of divine hierarchy, which will represent divine creators in the Manvantara to come, will be those men of this earth who will have attained the highest perfection, everyone of us, ladies and gentlemen, has before him or her a chance. If we behave well we will become, every one of us, one of these gentlemen—the Kumaras, they call them, the youths. Perhaps they too will in their turn hesitate to inhabit very unsavory bodies and be imprisoned in them; but they will have to do it in order to atone for the unpaid bills of the total of their past existence. Every one of us has to act according to law and Karmic law.

Keightley: Question 12 (Originally question 14.), page 194: “Bahak-Zivo…is ignorant of Orcus.” What does “Orcus” symbolize? You say in The Secret Doctrine that it is the “rebellious angels,” those who refuse to create, that are the intellectual saviors of mankind, and you prove that the fall through pride is only a theological libel on these, our true deliverers from ignorance. Yet what you have just

483 
said in answer to question 10 seems to imply this latter view. Please explain.

Blavatsky: It is true they have fallen in one sense, but not through pride; only through unwillingness to imprison themselves, as I have just said, in finite and limited form. But this is quite a different thing from what the theologians say. They aver these angels sought to become gods and dethrone gods, which is an absurdity. We say they were gods whom the law of evolution compelled to descend into matter, that is to say, to fall, but instead of submitting quietly to the law and incarnating at the proper time, they delayed until man had brutalized himself in his ignorance, and thus defiled themselves and the bodies which the law compelled them to inhabit. Theologians now speak of a hell into which they were hurled; and the occultists say the hell means simply the human body, and there is no other hell than earth. The fact that Christ and so many other solar gods—Hercules, etc.—descended into hell is an allegory pointing to just such imprisonment in the physical body. They are certainly our saviors, because without them we would be simply senseless animals. Therefore, what the theologians say is a perfect libel. They speak of angels who wanted to become gods.

Mr. ——: Is there no limit to the cycle of necessity after the egos attained the state Nirvana? Is there a possibility of having to go through succeeding rounds?

Blavatsky: The universe that they will inhabit will be immeasurably higher than the one they have inhabited, and therefore it is one more step to perfection—more and more and more.

Keightley: One question that suggests: When there is one more step to perfection, does it mean to carry with it the idea that as it is analogous to this universe, so, on the higher universe, there will be pleasure and pain?

Blavatsky: As the Absolute has never taken me into his confidence (For which perhaps he is to be blamed.), I cannot answer such questions as that.

484 
Keightley: The question is whether pleasure and pain are really limited to our plane of consciousness.

Blavatsky: I would ask you, if you please, what is pleasure and pain? Is it an eternal entity, or eternal entities?

Keightley: Why I put the question was this. For instance, we know there is differentiation—

Blavatsky: We know there is differentiation? We understand there is differentiation and are very proud of it, but whether there will be a differentiation of the same kind or another in other Manvantaras, this remains a secret. Even between the Absolute and the Logos.

Mr. Kingsland: Isn’t it possible that during another Manvantara everything may be arranged into nines or sixes, instead of sevens?

Blavatsky: It may be in the following Manvantara that two and two may not make four any longer, but it may make twelve. Something will happen we cannot expect.

Mr. ——Has there ever been number one evolved?

Blavatsky: Number one would be a difficult thing. It does not yield to any combination, it is unity. We must have two, at least, and two will never make a figure. Two is a despised number. Despised by the Pythagoreans. They were two straight lines, which started from nowhere, and did not know where they went to. Two we must not take, also.

Mr. ——: Then three is the lowest number?

Blavatsky: It is the first one from which you can make anything. You cannot make of one anything, or of two. One is unity. It may be endless and infinite.

Mr. ——: That is all from the point of view of the seven?

Mr. ——: Unless it is a circle.

485 
Blavatsky: The circle, if you please, is “the,” the root of number one, which is no number.

Keightley: You speak a good deal about various Gnostic systems; there are one or two points that wanted clearing up a little. Question 13, page 194: If Fetahil, as stated later, represents the host of the Lunar Pitris who created a senseless man, and if he is “a still purer spirit” than Bahak-Zivo, what does the latter correspond to?

Blavatsky: The Nazarene business is not at all plain, and is full of metaphor, chiefly directed against the God of the Jews, and their opponents. Therefore it is so mixed up that nobody will know which is which. He is represented sometimes as a higher spirit, and sometimes as a lower. Bahak-Zivo corresponds sometimes to Christ, and sometimes to other things. I have been bringing this in, not at all that you should come and ask me to learn it, because everyone can go and read it in the original, who reads Latin. But why I have quoted it here is, to show that in every system, high or low, the “Secret Doctrine” was repeated, and there were things which were all based on truth. But you need not go out of your way to make me teach you the Nazarene system.

Keightley: Question 14, page 194: “Bahak-Zivo…is ignorant of Orcus.” What does “Orcus” symbolize?

Blavatsky: Orcus symbolizes many things: Death, Hell; it symbolizes what the Buddhists would call Mara—many, many things. Orcus is a place of Darkness and Desolation, and since Bahak-Zivo was not acquainted with Orcus, that is to say, with the corresponding contrasted pole of life, he could not create beings, because he could not make a finite being. It is just the same as the thing which Siva throws out, which is more necessary than the Prince of Denmark to “Hamlet.”

Keightley: That is all in the questions.

Mr. Old: I was trying to evolve that idea which was generated with me, which you call wisdom. A thought did strike me a short time

486 
ago, that was in respect to the numerical basis of a Manvantara, or order of creation. There was the number seven as the root basis of this Manvantara. Do you speak of our limited Manvantara, or the Maha-Manvantara?

Blavatsky: Of all the Manvantaras that the Hindus speak about. Maybe it is of the solar system only.

Mr. Old: You speak of it in The Secret Doctrine as the root number of nature.

Blavatsky: In this Manvantara.

Mr. Old: You say in another Manvantara we may have five.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly we may, because Nature changes entirely in her manifestations and forms. Now go and see, if you please, and ask medicine, ask botany—you find in every department the septenary everywhere. Even the diseases can be septenary, 7, 14, 21, and so on. Here is a doctor; he will tell you everything is in seven. Take the flakes of snow, you will find in it the septenary number. You find six little spots, and a seventh in the middle. You take a drop of water, it splashes, and becomes a pentagon, and a six-pointed star. See what Tyndall writes about it. Once we had a discussion about it. There is not a thing where you can escape it. All this goes by the weeks of the Moon, weeks by septenates and everything.

Mr. Old: Of course that is quite true, but our scope of observation is so limited, that it is tied down to this plane.

Blavatsky: Then extend it. Try to see it with your third eye, and don’t look only with your two eyes. And try also to think with your spiritual brain.

Mr. Old: I want to identify myself with somebody or some Monad outside our solar system altogether.

Blavatsky: You cannot fail to identify yourself because it will identify you if you don’t. Every one of us, we were before and will

487 
be afterwards—not in our personalities, but in our higher selves. We may defy those selves as much as we like, yet they remain immortal. We cannot get rid of them, but they can get rid of us. Every and each consciousness of ours will feel it, and will see that it is entirely linked to it. It cannot be separated.

Mr. Old: Then the number of changes in mere units for the basic number would be seven. 2 you do not count, 1 is Absolute, 2 is nothing, and you have 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 as possibilities, that is to say, you have 7 possibilities.

Blavatsky: But the 7 are the principal forces in Nature. The 7 are all the 7 planets, the 7 planes of consciousness. It is the great mystery number. Take the Kabalah; you know yourself how the name is written, even the name of Tetragrammaton. If you put it in the Jewish letters, you make of it 3 and 4. Out of these, the 4 represent the 7 lower Sephiroth, and the 3, the 3 higher Sephiroth. If you add Shekhinah and Ain-Soph, you will have 9, not the 12, because the 3 are apart. Even the year is divided, because it divides itself naturally. Everything is divided into that.

Mr. Old: Then the term Nature—does that apply to everything in the solar system, or right away to infinity?

Blavatsky: It occurs in our solar system. At all events, I can’t say to anything outside of it, and you won’t find high adepts who will tell you much outside of the solar system.

Keightley: You said just now number 7 is found in the solar year. I don’t see quite how it comes in. It does not divide into 365.

Blavatsky: Ask Old, he’ll tell you.

Mr. Old: There was a difference. It was a matter of 360, the difference between 360 lunar, and 370 solar—that is to say, reckoning by digits or the degrees in the zodiac, apparent degrees—mathematical degrees, I should say. And the difference between these two was 365, which gives a solar circle roughly.

488 
Blavatsky: Very roughly, because in the tropical year it won’t agree.

Keightley: The true solar year is 365 and a quarter, about, and a fraction less than a quarter; but then I don’t think that divides into 7.

Mr. Old: No, certainly not. Not unless we proceed to minutes or seconds. I don’t know how it would work out then.

Keightley: I don’t see the 7.

Mr. Old: I will try and work it out.

Blavatsky: You will have 7 always, because 7 Manvantaras go in that, and the 7 in the tropical year, and the 7 in the solar year and the cycles. Well if you reckon or calculate you will see that the cycles come to number 7. They are septenates, the cycles, that is sure.

Mr. ——: Just now, madam, you were speaking of the word Nature as applying only to the solar system. Do you mean the planetary chain?

Blavatsky: No, the whole of the system.

Mr. ——: Then surely it includes the other ever-invisible planet.

Keightley: Certainly I think so.

Mr. ——: That is divisible by 7. 365 days, 4 hours, 49 minutes, 49 seconds.

Mr. Old: The latest calculation is 365 days, 5 hours, making nearly 6 hours. And if you add one leap day, you get beyond this, so that in about 213 years you would require to drop a day.

Blavatsky: That shows that you have got to calculate as the Hindus do, because they calculate, and sometimes they drop out, and sometimes they bring in. They always bring them into sevens. Look at their old astronomical works, the buildings in Benares, and in the old cities, they are all worked on that system. They were most

489 
curious machines for their buildings, instruments, and so on. The chief constellations are all septenaries. The seven Pleiades and the Great Bear and everywhere are all seven. When I come to think about this blessed Sabbath and the seventh day and rest that is taken bodily from the periods, the Manvantaric periods, the seven races and so on, I say they don’t understand it. That is the day of rest, that is to say, the Pralaya. They come and they make in this blessed England a regular Pralaya on the Sundays, so that everyone is ready to go and cut off his head and die; because to begin with the ancient Jews did not have a week at all, they did not have names for days of the week. They had only one, it was the seventh day they knew, and nothing else. They were calculating by the Moon, the lunar calculation.

Mr. Old: How far back do the Jews’ days date? We have 300 B.C., we have the seven days of the week given according to the planets. I suppose it would be a period quite anterior to that you refer to?

Blavatsky: They never had a week.

Mr. Old: Was it the Assyrians?

Blavatsky: The Chaldeans had. The Athenian week was ten days, the Roman eight days. It was only the Hindus who had seven days, and had a planetary name for each day of the week, and it is from the Hindus that it comes. They went and began calculating, and took the names of the solar angels, which belong to the solar calculation, and they shoved them and stuck them on the weeks which belong to the lunar calculations, so they made a mess of it. It is a terrible mess in astronomy; they have mixed up the colours, the metals, they have mixed up everything, as you know yourself.

Proceedings closed.