
Keightley: You quoted this passage: “And there was war in heaven.” etc. (Reads from The Secret Doctrine.) Question 1. “Michael and his angels fought against the Dragon and his angels” (page 194). What is the “Dragon,” exactly?

Blavatsky: The “Dragon” is so many things, my beloved brethren, that my answer depends on what you mean by the question. In which of the seven symbolical meanings do you want me to explain it? If your answer refers to Revelation, then I cannot answer it, as I would have to tread on forbidden grounds—not because I am a Christian—St. John’s Revelation is not a Christian work, but is simply the Christianized form of prophecy, which is universal—and I can assure you it is one of the most occult things for anyone who understands it. Now, astronomically, of course, in one sense—for there are several—the “Dragon” is the Moon producing an eclipse over the Sun. This you all know, and astrologists more than any anyone else. Mystically, in general, it is matter or the lower self. It was called the “Dragon” over which the Sun’s spirit, or the higher self, triumphed during the trials of initiation. Now the third meaning, also an occult meaning, is in The Secret Doctrine, and in connection with the allegorical “fall.” The “Dragon” symbolized the sons of wisdom incarnating in humanity, and thus hurled into the Hell of matter, which is our bodies, because there is no Hell outside of our own dear persons here. It is humanity, and on this Earth, that is Hell, and nowhere else. Four, in esoterical allegorical history

492
the “Dragon” represents the secret wisdom which was obscured and driven from the field by the dead letter of dogma in ritualism; while five, Christian theology has availed itself of all these Pagan legends to build up the dogma of “Satan,” the foremost pillar of the Christian religious scheme, because if there were not devils there would be no Christian religion. Take away the Devil, and what will remain? Why should Christ come to have saved, and who would he have saved? So that the Devil really is the great prop of Christianity, and so you must, everyone of you who feels like it, have a great reverence for the Devil. This is my advice to you all; I do not suppose any of you will accept it.

Keightley: Then further on you compare the cosmogony of the old Gnostics with that of the “Secret Doctrine,” and you speak about the “Seven Stellars.” Question 2, page 195: The “Seven Stellars,” being the product of the Astral Light and blind Matter, must be evil. Is, then, the influence of the seven planets all evil as far as man is concerned?

Blavatsky: I do not think so. Why should you go and insult the poor planets? The term planets here does not refer to the seven sacred planets at all, but means simply they are planetary bodies within our system. If the expression is erroneous or leads to any equivocation, in the second edition you have only to make a mark there and change it. But this is what it means. The seven bad Stellars are the progeny of Saturn and the Moon. That is to say, corruptness in the Nazarenes representing in one sense blind, frantic matter ever devouring its own progeny, is identical with Saturn; while [  ], the mother of that [  ], in the Nazarenes is the Moon, at the same time that she is the lower Astral Light. Some mystics assert that these seven bad Stellars are represented by seven moons, though there are eight. There is an old Coptic legend which related how the mother, or the Moon, after her union and junction with her son, Saturn, in order to prevent him from devouring his own children cast him down on to the earth, where they became the seven capital sons. It is they who are credited with the building of everything material on

493
the Earth. Even western astrologers are familiar with the evil effects of the junction of Saturn with the Moon. Now, Mr. Old, tell us something about that. In what way is it bad?

Mr. Old: It has so many renderings, and the influences are so various, it depends entirely upon the radical tendency to take that particular form of evil—as for instance, the corrupt tendencies at birth, which you understand is nothing less than the Karmic horoscope. If the tendency were towards martial or inflammatory evils and diseases and rash precipitous forms of mind, then of course they would not come in the same degree under the influence of Saturn. But if you were predisposed to melancholia and so catch cold and so suffer all those evils which arise out of adjustion {adjustment} and contraction, frigidity, then you would come remarkably under the influence of Saturn at the time of this junction and according to the position in your own Karmic Map, then you would suffer accordingly. So that you see it depends entirely upon the angular distance with respect to the space of the birth, and then also the sign of the zodiac from which it transpires.

Blavatsky: In astrology I believe there are many good things, only somehow or other they do not reckon as we do. Of course it comes to the same results; but there is a difference.

Keightley: Saturn is regarded in astrology as the most evil- producing of all the planets.

Mr. Old: Certainly, and at the same time, you know, it has been said that the origin of the name is [  ], the pure fire. So that he has a reverse aspect also; whereas he is the great evil, he is also the great good, in this sense.

Blavatsky: Just like the Hindu Shiva, he is destructive because he is the regenerative power; because a seed cannot come to life unless it first perishes, he destroys only to regenerate.

Mr. Old: I noticed that particularly when you spoke of the

494
Dragons—that is to say, the [  ], the eighth sign of the zodiac,169 which corresponds to the eighth house of death; and you know eight is a very bad number.

Keightley: Well! It is all matter, matter, matter.

Mr. Old: And while you said that, I have no doubt they also noticed it was also the symbol of archaic wisdom.

Blavatsky: Well, the “Dragons” are, which I will give you here by and by—all the “Dragons” were the emblems. They called the sons of the “Dragons,” the initiates. In China, also where the “Dragon” is the symbol of power and the symbol of the Imperial family, the “Dragons” are considered very high beings. It is an allegory.

Mr. Old: I suppose the New Testament assertion is a Gnostic assertion? (Quotes from the Testament. Mem., I could not catch the quotation - BdB.)

Blavatsky: Most assuredly.

Keightley: Question 3, page 199: “The older wheels rotated downward and upward…” Does the expression “rotated downward and upward” refer to the outbreathing, which occupies the first half of any Manvantara, and the “inbreathing,” which takes place in its second half? Or does it refer to the direction of the rotation which takes place about the Laya centres, upon which the wheels are formed?

Blavatsky: It refers to neither and to both and so much more, which I cannot give out now. You will have to wait for it. Have patience a little.

Keightley: Question 4. You say that man must awaken the three “seats” to life and activity. Do you mean by this phrase that the three “seats” have no life and activity on their own planes, i.e. per se, or, merely, that our human consciousness on this plane must be awakened to perceive and reflect their activity?

495
Blavatsky: It refers to what is said in The Secret Doctrine, and very plainly; whatever the three higher “seats” in cosmos may be, the three corresponding higher “seats” in man—whether we call them states or seats of consciousness, or principles—have to be awakened before they can be attuned to the three higher planes in cosmos. And once they are so attuned, the knowledge will {reveal} sufficiently what their sources and fons et origo are. It is knowledge enough. Besides which, The Secret Doctrine teems with this. And I am not going to answer things that The Secret Doctrine explains. If you who put the questions do not choose to read The Secret Doctrine, I am not going to repeat it like a poll parrot, because it is perfectly useless asking me questions that are impossible of explanation. Ask me questions that are dark then I am perfectly ready and at your service, but not to say things which have been a great deal better put in The Secret Doctrine than I can give you.

Mr. Old: You see, HPB, I had some little hand in formulating that question. You see, it leaves us in the dark to a certain extent; because, although perhaps reference is found and full information given elsewhere, still in confining ourselves to respectable limits for one evening it did not give me the idea that there was any activity per se.

Blavatsky: Where? In the human “seats,” or the cosmic “seats”?

Mr. Old: In the human, because you speak of that being awakened.

Blavatsky: Certainly, there are none; but once that they are awakened, they must be attuned to the seats of the cosmic planes, or else I can assure you it won’t produce good results, because the man will become a Frankenstein Jr.—everything that is horrid. For those are the rare cases when the higher powers are awakened and put to bad use by matter, which is so intensely stronger that it forces a man into the worst of vices and black magic and therefore he ends in Avichi. These are the rare cases that are spoken about in Esoteric Buddhism.

Keightley: It is what Sinnett calls “evil spirituality.”

496
Mr. Old: Does the elevation of the spiritual consciousness precede or come after the awakening? Or is it the cause of the awakening?

Blavatsky: The cause of awakening depends a good deal upon the higher Manas, and how it perceives the universe, and how it can discern right from the wrong—for the man has the faculty in him of discerning, really, that which is wrong universally (I do not mean about Mrs. Grundy’s code of honour.) Then he can attune his seats with those on the higher cosmic plane. And then he becomes at one with Nature; he becomes a co-worker with Nature, he helps Nature, and therefore Nature helps him. But, gentlemen, unfortunately, the three—excepting persons who lead very high lives—this certainly don’t awaken. There is the higher Manas, the intelligence in man in the physical brain. We see plenty of intellectual men, but they are nothing but—they are higher intellectual animals. They have no spirituality in them.

Mr. Old: Would not you rather say then it is the men, the individuals, who don’t awaken to the existence of these three higher principles—not the principles which awaken?

Blavatsky: I never said the cosmic seats have to be awakened. Perhaps it is badly put; it is the fault of the editors. You see, I don’t understand the value of the English language, and I had about six or seven editors, and they have made a nice mess of it. For me it is perfectly written. Now, if I happen to have written it in such a way as to lead into error, it is the right thing to make a sign or mark and correct it in the second edition.

Keightley: I think it is to a certain extent expressed, because she says here: it remains with him to attune the three higher states in himself, but before he can attune these states he must awaken the “seats” to life and activity. 170

Blavatsky: It is not the “seats” at all in cosmos. It is just the same as if you told me that a mosquito could influence the

497
Himalayas.

Mr. Old: You mean to say their correspondences on this plane have to be awakened.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly.

Mr. Kingsland: If you said, instead of “seats,” “sense” or “principles,” there would be no confusion. I don’t think seats is quite a good word.

Blavatsky: Why don’t you put it for the second or third edition.

Mr. Kingsland: Even “sense” would be a better word than “seats.”

Keightley: It is the occult words.

Blavatsky: “Seats” means vehicles.

Keightley: It is put in converted commas.

Mr. Old: We are quite right in saying that whether we know it or not, these three principles—Atman, Buddhi, and Buddhi-Manas—all have activity on their own planes.

Blavatsky: They have, but not with respect to man. They don’t influence, so to say, the lower quaternary, which is the personal man. They have certainly their activity, but it does not influence, and therefore the lower quaternary remains the animal, the personality, that is for eating and drinking, and selfishness and money-making, and political things and so on. I wish them joy.

Keightley: Question 5, page 200: In the diagram, Hod and Netzah are figured as lying on two planes at once, which is not the case for the corresponding “globes” in the eastern system. Is this intentional?

Blavatsky: It is done not intentionally, but because it was a thing of necessity. We live in a three-dimensional space, and a certain limited set of geometrical figures are given to us. The Hod and Netzah are not on two planes at once; but as a sphere cannot be

498
well put astride on a straight line otherwise than by seeming on two planes, how could I do it? The diagram could not be done otherwise, if the orthodox Kabalistic arrangement had to be retained at all. I tried to retain it, and I could not do otherwise. Mind you, I take the seven lower Sephiroth, I do not take the whole ten. I leave others, as I don’t mention them here. They put the whole ten on four planes: the archetypal world, the intellectual, and so on; I could not do it because we have a thing of seven, therefore I had to come and cram these in. Moreover, remembering that the Sephiroth letter is on four planes, and composed of ten Sephiroth and in the Kabalah, how could one arrange the thing otherwise, when only the seven lower Sephiroth were used? The Chaldean Kabalah, moreover, the Book of Numbers, agrees perfectly with the eastern arrangement, and disagrees with the present orthodox Kabalah in its diagrams. This is no fault of The Secret Doctrine. Now, look here: I had a rabbi who had the real Book of Numbers—and there is another; I have only seen two in my life, and I don’t think there exist more. He had fragments of the Chaldean Kabalah. With that, when I came to take notes (I had large books.), when I came to compare with the Rosenroth translation,171 I saw they had changed it in the most wonderful way. How can you have the Kabalah of [  ], when the Kabalah was entirely lost in the thirteenth century? Moses de Leon, who is accused of forgery—which is perfect nonsense—took all he could find.172 What did he do? He had, as so many links were missing, and so many things were lost, to go to the eastern Christians, and to the Chaldean Gnostics to ask them to help, since they had their own Kabalah. And the result is, you find more of Christian eternity—the Virgin Mary, Joseph, etc.—than the wisdom of the old [  ]. That is the result. Now, in the Chaldean Kabalah, in the Book of Numbers, you have the wisdom of the Hebrew initiates, but you have not got it in this; they have been so interfering with it, that Mr. Isaac Myer

499
may say what he likes, and Mr. Mathers also; I say there is more flapdoodle than truth. There is a thing just as Isaac Myer says; did you hear about him, Mr. Cobb, 173 of Mr. Isaac Myer, who wrote the Qabbalah?174

Mr. Cobb: I did not.

Blavatsky: He writes perfectly truly that the Kabalah written there is one of the eleventh century, which is written by Ben Judah.175 They thought the man an Arabic philosopher. Very well, he has these things perfectly. Many of his fragments are perfectly Kabalistic, and just the same as the Chaldean Kabalah; whereas you don’t find it, if you compare it with the other. I say it is more than that.

Mr. Mead: These Chaldean Gnostics, are they the Gnostics of [  ]?

Blavatsky: Yes, they had dogma enough to throw everything into confusion, and that is why you find now that by the methods, by these Gemara,176 you can do anything you like; you can find in the Kabalah Washington and the President of the United States: you can find anything in the Kabalah.

Mr. Kingsland: Are there any more questions with reference to this diagram?

Keightley: There is a question relating to the note to the diagram. Question 6. (Note to diagram.) Can you define more clearly the term “Cosmic Consciousness”?

Blavatsky: It is an easy question, this. “Cosmic Consciousness” has been defined hundreds of times in The Secret Doctrine as the

500
collective or aggregate consciousness of those Dhyanis, or Dhyan-Chohans, called the builders of the universe, physical and spiritual, or that which the Masons call—making a plurality of unity—the architects or the G.A.O.T.U.,177 so that the Cosmic Consciousness will come after.

Mr. Kingsland: There is a question which I had here.

Mr. Keightley: Page 199, last paragraph. You have spoken of “these seven planes (which) correspond to the seven states of (human) consciousness in man,” and in the note {on page 200}, the second note to the diagram, you say “the seven states of human consciousness pertain to quite another question.” Speaking of the diagram you say, “these are the four lower planes of Cosmic Consciousness…the seven states of human consciousness pertain to quite another question.” These two quotations appear to contradict each other. What then is the connection between the seven planes as given in the diagram, and the seven states of consciousness? And what is the “other question”?

Blavatsky: Ah! But you see, you want me to give you three volumes, and I cannot give it to you. Remember only one thing, that the seven states of consciousness in man are not only states of consciousness as Herbert Spencer understands it, but also the feeling, the consciousness of the ego. For instance, I am smoking a cigarette, and I am pitching into you, and so on. There are many states of consciousness. Those states of which I speak belong to one order, and others to another. I don’t mean to say they are not the same, but there is an infinite gradation in all of them. Now, there are the higher states of metaphysical consciousness. Can you compare it with the consciousness I have of having taken a cigarette, and smoking it?

Mr. Kingsland: What is the order of those states of consciousness, which refer to those seven planes? It will all come in analogy. If you read it afterwards, you will find it all dovetails.

Keightley: I don’t know whether this is legitimate, but it

501
is what struck me. The seven states of human consciousness are practically seven states of consciousness on the terrestrial plane.

Blavatsky: There is a consciousness while we sleep—during sleep, and a consciousness while we are awake. There is a consciousness when we look mechanically at something. There is one consciousness {that} takes in external objects, and the other goes wool-gathering. There are many degrees of consciousness; you cannot go and call consciousness all one.

Keightley: Yet get to this, the seven planes of Cosmic Consciousness.

Blavatsky: There is consciousness that I am positively in India with this lamp, and here I am in the North Pole.

Keightley: I think there is where the distinction lies, that the seven human states are analogous to the seven cosmic states, but they cover a very much smaller range.

Mr. Kingsland: The fact of the matter is, there are seven states of consciousness on each of the seven planes.

Blavatsky: You remember what Cobb said the other day. He began to give us the mathematical series that never ended. There was some seventh question that I got mad over, and which has been asked hundreds of times. I said this has been stated very clearly in The Secret Doctrine, and I refuse to answer questions that have been already in previous writings, and are in The Secret Doctrine, and have been stated on Thursdays. I refuse to pass time on Thursday nights in more repetition.

Keightley: Well, question 8. Question 8, page 200: In occultism, are the terms “seed” and “atom” synonymous?

Blavatsky: There, there! Isn’t that the same thing?

Keightley: You give a hint there as to the question we have been hunting after a good deal: the real meaning of the word “atom.”
