
502
Blavatsky: You are the most inquisitive people I ever met. If it were not your unmentionables that protect you, you would all be Mother Eves, every one of you! You are the most inquisitive people I ever saw in my life, and you are the most impertinent. You cannot come and ask one thing after another, Tuesday after Monday, Wednesday after Tuesday, and so on. You want to jump from Monday to Saturday and from Saturday to Halifax. Upon my word, I have no patience.

Keightley: Question 9, page 201: Can you give us some more definite idea—e.g., an analogy on the physical plane—of what is meant here by “Cosmic Desire” which “evolves into absolute Light”?

Blavatsky: Now there is a question for a modest young woman. The answer is found even in Hesiod’s cosmogony. What is the use of attempting to learn occultism and eastern esoteric philosophy, if one is not acquainted with the exoteric classics? The reply to this is stated in The Secret Doctrine. Now I am going to examine you. Have you read Hesiod’s cosmogony, Old?

Mr. Old: No.

Blavatsky: Have the goodness to go to the British Museum, and read it. Mr. Cobb has read it. If you have not read it, what {can} I do? Nevertheless, I will attempt to explain it again in a few words. Take Hesiod, and try and understand what he says, and better still, [  ] Phoenician cosmogony. There you will find that what [  ] calls pure force is the principle of creation. It is identical with Brahmâ’s will to create, which you have read many times in the Vishnu Purana. In the primitive world cosmogonies, Chaos is not what it became later on, or that on which the Spirit of God moved on the waters. It is not the [  ] of Ovid, matter in its inert and confused or chaotic state. Chaos was space, according to Aristotle, gaping space or the void—ǹ  ,178 and after Hesiod, Chaos is absolutely limitless, it is the dark shoreless cloud of vapors, which gives birth to the universe.

503
Now, if you remember that the first of the three primordial elements at the first flutter of differentiation were and are with Hesiod, Chaos, and, with Eros, elements that were never conceived (As they were co-existent potentiality in all eternity.), you will perhaps understand that which I say, that no more than primordial Venus was Eros—that which both became in later ages. Now Eros means simply human love, and worse; but then it meant the most solemn metaphysical and divine thing. Eros was not at the beginning the wily God of Love and passion with wings and arrows to wound the hearts of sentimental ninnies with. There were no such fools, nor yet men enough; but he who is now God of human love was simply an abstract idea, and image of the Divine creative force—that universal force of attraction which causes particles to congregate, combine, and correlate, and to produce a triad. Well, that creative force is our Fohat, who neither creates, nor does he produce anything per se and by himself, but in virtue of his action, elements, as well as beings, seek to unite in polarity; from which unison results life. Remember that in the first cosmogony out of Chaos are born Erebus and Nox, primordial and already differentiated darkness divided into two principles, male and female, from which two emanate the other two, Aether and [  ] {Hemera}, in the light of the superior regions and that inferior or terrestrial atmosphere. Light is born of darkness number two, darkness on the differentiated plane, and that darkness begets light under the influence of creative love, or that which is called there “cosmic desire”; or again Fohat, the electric creative principles which make of all one, and which produces the three, the correlation.

Keightley: What you have said there is very good, and it is a great deal more than you have said anywhere in The Secret Doctrine.

Blavatsky: But I thought you stood there over me when I was writing.

Mr. Mead: Eros was always first-born of the Gods.

Blavatsky: Eros is the first-born—he is not the first-born, he is coeval. Chaos, Eros and [  ] {Gaia} are coeval, therefore none

504
of these three elements are conceived, they are simply co-existent in eternity; only at the moment of differentiation they manifest themselves, that is to say, out of the subjective and the non-being comes being, and then after that they begin to come on each other and react. This is the polarity, this electrical force, to which belongs our blood and life and anything. It is life, in short. This is cosmic desire.

Mr. Mead: Cupid is simply the lower aspect.

Blavatsky: Take Hesiod’s cosmogony, and see the enormous difference there is between what Hesiod says and what later on the mythologies have invented. Even a few hundred years before our era, then it was a most sublime thing, and pretended to the mysteries, and now they made of it—I don’t know what.

Mr. ——: How can Gaia be said to be coeval?

Blavatsky: Ask Hesiod; take him by the beard.

Keightley: It means the abstract.

Blavatsky: The female portion in Chaos.

Mr. Mead: The Earth that no one has seen.

Mr. Old: There was just that word “absolute” that I have not, and if they made it in connection with that, this absolute appears to be the effect of cosmic desire. Well now, the idea of the absolute as we postulate it—

Blavatsky: Why do you use the word absolute?

Keightley: It evolves into absolute light.

Blavatsky: On the manifested plane; if we take it metaphysically again, I say the Christians can make it into perfect light. When I say “Absolute” I quote it or underline it. But when I put absolute, I just use the expression as perfect.

Keightley: Absolute light of the manifested plane.

505
Mr. Old: But Eros, or Lucifer, any one aspect, is that light?

Blavatsky: Certainly it is.

Keightley: Then you go on to say this: “now light without any shadow would be absolute light,” etc. (Reads from The Secret Doctrine. {I:201}) Question 10. The idea of “Fire” has usually been associated in mystic writings with Spirit rather than Matter. Can you tell us why you associate it here with the latter?

Blavatsky: Because I am not a mystic writer, and I try to make you understand things a little less misty than they are, and you instead in thanking me, criticize me. The physical, or the material and finite universe, is the shadow thrown upon the screen or illusion or Maya by eternal light, or the universal fire. It symbolizes with every nation the creative deity. Primordial matter is not our dense matter, but spirit; hence the spirit of creative fire, or heat, or cosmic desire again. How can you dissociate fire from matter, any more than spirit from matter? Can you do it, when the latter spirit or matter is materialized spirit, and spirit is potentially matter? That is what we say in occultism. If mystic writings held less to poetry and fantastic imagery, and a little more to plain statement of fact, they would be less misty, and those who study them more positive than they are now about the real end of things. Fire is spirit and fire is matter, and if a particle of the London slush can be found without the two qualities, fire and spirit, then mankind had better accept at once the anthropomorphic idea of the Church Fathers, and the dead letter of the Bible, and not its philosophy. You cannot come and say what the mystic writers could write in those days, when for every truth it was said there was immediately an inquisition, and so many cardinals to burn and roast you. Now you won’t find mystic writers; now it is time to state plain facts, because there is no one to burn them any more—except after death.

Keightley: In this little extract from the commentaries, speaking about the world germs and so on, you say (Reads from The Secret Doctrine.) Question 11. It is said that “the older (bodies) attract

506
the younger, while others repel them.” What are these “others” here spoken of, and why should it be the older bodies that attract?

Blavatsky: I suppose they are wiser, less green than others. On this I can say no more than is given in The Secret Doctrine. There is such a thing as attraction and repulsion, and in occultism it stands in the place of gravity, the scientific teachings about which we reject. This belongs to occult physics, before the turn of which comes for us on Thursday evenings the twentieth century must have dawned. I give you everything I can give; don’t you ask me for more.

Mr. Old: Then I suppose occultism recognizes an attraction which has no relation to bulk. It overthrows the accepted Western idea.

Blavatsky: If I have one thing well in my memory it is the 20, 30, perhaps 100 conversations we had with Mr. Cobb, sitting there. When it came out here with the fourth-dimensional space—which was ridiculous, because the fourth-dimensional space, taken simply, means the fall of matter through matter, the impenetrability of matter—and we had many conversations; and he knows perfectly well in occultism no one believes in this gravity question. We believe attraction and repulsion. Is it not so, Mr. Cobb?

Mr. Cobb: I believe it is so.

Blavatsky: You remember what conversations we had in New York? And you were the first one who said it.

Mr. Cobb: I do not know about that, I am sure.

Blavatsky: You said always it was attraction and repulsion.

Mr. Cobb: I did not know I was the first, at all.

Blavatsky: Well, it is the old occult axiom.

Keightley: Question 12, page 202: In these pages you distinctly state that, even in the higher phases of cosmic evolution, there rages a “struggle for existence.” Now it is on this struggle for existence, regarded as a universal law, that the materialists base

507
their justification of human selfishness. We would therefore ask: (a)

Where does this “struggle” for existence” cease: (1) in reference to the cosmos; (2) as regards humanity? (b) How is it that this cosmic law is suspended by that of altruism in the case of human beings?

Blavatsky: The struggle for existence rages universally in sidereal as in terrene spaces. This is the first fundamental law in nature, the visible effects of which materialistic science has called correlation of physical forces in matter. But this applies only and solely to differentiated matter; it has nothing to do with individual or even personal units, which ought to be, if they are not, guided by the higher laws of the upper triad and not by the instinctual impulses acting on the plane of the lower quarternary. The struggle for existence begins with the physical molecules and ends with those animals which are quite irrational. This is therefore no justification for human selfishness, as man is an animal on a higher plane of being and consciousness than is the animal. The man is a higher animal and on a higher plane of consciousness than the animal; even the most abject savage is. I answer with regard to physical cosmos; the struggle will come {to an end?} only with the coming of Pralaya. With respect to its living and conscious beings, however, the [  ] ceases to operate at that human stage where consciousness and reason make their appearance. It is in man alone that the higher divine triad may be fully active, but this triad is trinity in unity, and unity or homogeneity characterizes the plane of its action. In the four lower planes of cosmos, on the contrary, it is the law of diversity and heterogeneity which reign supreme. Hence those beings who are endowed with the higher triad come under its laws, not under those of the lower quaternary, which act only upon those beings, atoms or things in which rationality is still an underdeveloped potentiality. Therefore, since true law of being is unity, the higher self in him, it follows that the individual human being can only attain his complete and perfect development by acting in perfect unity, that is to say harmony, with all other men. Now (b). The struggle for existence which exists today among men proves only that firstly, man has not yet fully emerged from his savage animal condition, his Manas

508
not yet being fully developed in this our Fourth Round, for it will be only in the fifth; and secondly, that the great men of learning who proclaim selfishness as the great law of human life are, their learning and intellect notwithstanding, not on a much higher plane themselves. In other words, these learned gentlemen are still animals. Whoever wants to go and tell them, let them. What have you got to say? Are you going to take up the defense of the men of learning—of the F.R.S.’s179 and so on?

Mr. Kingsland: There is a question of mine that rather bears upon that, if I might read it.

Blavatsky: Do please.

Mr. Kingsland: Is it the case that no human being, adept, or initiate can progress during the present round beyond what humanity will be at the close of the Seventh Race, or can they progress as far as what humanity will be at the close of the Seventh Round? Is there not some limit beyond which they cannot progress as individuals, but must wait for the development of humanity as a whole?

Blavatsky: Assuredly, the Seventh Round. They cannot—the greatest adepts cannot. When I say the word adepts in the plural, it is too bumptious. I have heard of one only, or two—one at the beginning of each age that may progress and be in that state in which man will be in the Seventh Round; beyond that they cannot. No one can go beyond his Manvantara, not the highest adepts.

Mr. Kingsland: Then that is really the basis of everyone helping humanity. It is really helping themselves?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. It is the most logical thing and the plainest in the world. People will not understand that by hurting their neighbors they hurt themselves. If it is not now, it will be in another incarnation. Of course if you don’t believe in it, it is another thing. But if you believe in it, it will be so, because if I hurt this finger the whole of my body will feel it. I may neglect it, but it may come

509
in five years, because not the smallest little things remain without effects. Our universe is a concatenation of causes and effects. There is not the smallest thing that we can do to our brothers or neighbors—or even persons—that we won’t suffer for, and the whole humanity also. It is just the same when you disturb an enormous pool of water; if you disturb but in one place, then every drop of water in that pool will feel it; there will be reaction. I say that this selfishness of races, of individuals; of diversity of religion; of everything, this is the great curse not only of the nineteenth century, but it will last so long as we do not change or become a little better than we are. But this humanity here, nothing can be compared with. No imagination can create devils in hell as bad and as wicked as humanity is on the whole. Every race hates the other. One race goes and spits on the other; another says: “I am the one.” It is something terrible to look at. Man, instead of becoming better spiritually every day, becomes worse and worse and worse. This selfishness that you think—“everything for me”—it is a thing which hurts you first and most; this will be proven to you logically as 2 and 2 make 4; it cannot fail to do so. When they come and speak to me about a struggle, I say, the materialists go and say: “The struggle for existence is the great law; therefore let us go and annex a country, as the Russians go and annex places”; but you begin by putting stuff in your guns and shooting out of them at these unfortunate people—as they did last year in Burma, where about 200 were shot. That is the brotherly love; and they call themselves Christians. Good Heavens! Why, they are devils, all of them! They are not human beings, all those who go and make war and kill people and hurt everyone.

Mr. Old: But apart from any efforts that we may make either individually or as a race, is there not a law in the human universe which prescribes our making a certain advance? Is there no law which limits our advance during a certain age?

Blavatsky: There are certain boundaries; you cannot go further. Nobody expects you to become omniscient gods all at once, or angels and the kindest men; but there are limits, that the more

510
civilization progresses the more man becomes wicked and selfish and the more it is the poor who suffer on account of the rich. The misery and the suffering never was greater on this Earth than it is in the nineteenth century, which is the accursed age among all ages.

Mr. Hall: I suppose there will be a reaction?

Blavatsky: And the reaction will be a terrible one. Look at the socialists. It is the highest and the noble-minded; notwithstanding their efforts, it is the anarchism that is produced. And when the time comes that the people starve wholesale everywhere, I can assure you there is no law that will be able to impede the movement.

Mr. Hall: Do you think it will ever come?

Blavatsky: You have great faith in your 10,000 policemen. Fortunately the time has not come yet. If they go on as they do it is something terrible. I don’t mean England alone. Show to me the country where people are not starving. With every new invention that comes, there are several who become millionaires, and in proportion there are so many thousands who starve. That seems to be the law.

Mr. Hall: I should not think the reaction will be quite so severe as that. It will be met through legislation.

Blavatsky: I invite you to read my editorial in Lucifer.180 I have poured all my heart there, and I can assure you I did not pay them compliments. They may abuse me as much as they like. For me and for every Theosophist there ought to be no distinction between races, colour, creed, ideas or anything.

A Lady: There ought to be.

Blavatsky: But there is, unfortunately. Look at the Anglo- Indians; 181 look at the supreme contempt they show for the Hindus

511
who are intellectually and spiritually a thousand times higher than we are. “Inferior race.” Inferior for what? Why, Englishmen were not even in the state of molecules in space when India was old with wisdom, and they come and speak about the Hindus being an inferior race! Now this is that pride of which it is spoken in the Bible, and I verily believe all you English say you were the fallen angels. Every one of you are devils from your wickedness.

Mr. Kingsland: Is it not possible for the different races to incarnate in another race? May we not have been Indians on previous incarnations?

Blavatsky: Yes; or you would not be as you are. You are sure to be, all of you who are so proud—I tell Sinnett every day that I see him, he is sure to be an outcast in India for his sins. And he does not like it at all.

Keightley: Question 13, page 204: The nuclei of cosmic matter after generation take elliptic and parabolic courses. The former, owing to their inferior velocity, are generally absorbed by suns, whereas the latter escape absorption by their greater velocity. Can any explanation be given of this original difference of velocity, on which the whole future evolution of the “nucleus” depends?

Blavatsky: The velocity with which a nucleus starts on its sidereal career depends in the first place upon the “hour” of its birth. By hour I mean the stage or period of the universal life cycle at which it starts upon its life pilgrimage. Of these stages there are seven to which the Brahmins refer as the seven creations, and which in Genesis are called the six but ought to be called the seven days of creation. Now, if you ask me why the seven days and not the six, I answer because the seventh day which is described in Genesis as the day of rest really represents the seventh stage of creation. It is not one of full rest or inactivity, but simply represents that period when everything has been harmonized and came into equilibrium, and when the evolutionary impulse has slackened down to a uniform rate of motion and everything assumed an orderly and uninterrupted

512
and regular course, as is exhibited to us in the regular succession of years, seasons, months, weeks, days, etc. All those chaotic forces which have been in their impulse struggling for life came down and settled; and there is the first day of rest when everything went in the orderly way. This is what I mean. Now, the seventh day, really, taking it occultly, means the seventh Manvantara; that is, the day when everything has evoluted in this life cycle, and everything will come to a point and everyone will be as good as the other, and there will be no more backbiting and no more hitting of each other’s noses, and we will be decent people, then. The Pralaya is the seventh day. The Pralaya is called generally the evening of the day of the Seventh Round; and then it will last as long as the whole. If you go and read the old rabbinical books and all those things of Babylonia, you will find the idea stated perfectly well. Why is it that the Sadducees did not believe as the Pharisees did? Because they were learned occultists and kabalists; they observed Sabbath, but they understood what the meaning of Sabbath was perfectly philosophically. Because look at this Babylonian treatise and you find that it means the seventh period and that it means—well, it is a perfectly astronomical thing, but it is just what the Brahmins called the seventh creation, as it is seventh day and nothing else.

Mr. Kingsland: In Genesis it says the evening and morning were the seventh day.

Blavatsky: It is the Manvantaric dawn and Pralaya, as well.
