
Mr. Kingsland: Just the same as we count the day as the day and the night.

Keightley: Have you not got something more?

Blavatsky: The creative impulse has settled down to quiet family life for a time. Consequently, the initial velocity of the nucleus depends upon the place it occupies in the series of descending generations from the primordial mother or matter. Mother and matter are the same, and now some dark disciples who know what I mean may explain further. There is one (Pointing to Mr. B Keightley.)

513
who has learned enough to have forgotten half of it, but I would like to know if he has forgotten the other half.

Keightley: What that means is this: if you take the very beginning of the Manvantara, you get from the descendants of primordial matter the first animated cosmic nuclei; then after that they pass through their Manvantara, and they become, first comets, then suns and then planets; then they die and their principles are transferred to a fresh Laya centre, which are like the children of the first generation. Then they pass through their series of evolutions and are reborn again as the grandchildren, and so on through innumerable generations.

Blavatsky: You had better to have also about the mother-in- law!

Keightley: In each of these stages the impulse, as it were, gradually diminishes to a certain extent so that the velocity with which the Laya centre or cosmic nucleus starts on its career is diminished.

Mr. Mead: What was puzzling there was the elliptical and the parabolic orbit.

Keightley: Many comets have elliptical orbits. It is simply a question of the velocity, as it is stated here. Entirely a question of the initial velocity with which a nucleus starts. There are comets which have both elliptical and parabolic orbits.

Blavatsky: In the beginning there is always the impulse, and it goes quicker.

Keightley: There are several comets the return periods of which are well-known. They expect them back at certain periods, and look out for them. They have very elongated elliptical orbits of enormous concentricity. Other comets have arrived in parabolic orbits, and we shall never have the pleasure of seeing them again; they are gone. Look at any map of the Sun.

514
Blavatsky: I would like them to understand why the impulse is greater at the beginning and then slackens—because it sets into respectable form, and there are laws; and periodically it goes on seasons and years and so on which it did not before; therefore it slackens. The motion is always there.

Keightley: “‘The abodes of Fohat are many,’ it is said,” etc. (Reads from The Secret Doctrine. {I:204}) Question 14. “The ancients made the polar circles seven instead of two.” Are we to assign four of these to the North Pole, and three to the South; or are the seven lokas counted from the equator, north and south?

Blavatsky: If I were you I would, every one of you, go and ask to become a critic in The Saturday Review,182 because you are so crotchety. I now say this is not my fault, but as the proverb says: “seven cooks spoil the broth,” so I had seven editors. I wrote and wrote and they took it and corrected; and so, if you please, there would be no mistakes. And the result is that they have allowed to pass such flapdoodles and corrected some that were well written, only “to better the English,” and they have made a flapdoodle of it. And this is one of the flapdoodles, because it is not in this way that it ought to read. The sentence should be: “The ancients counted seven circles and at each pole” instead of one at each—instead of two; or to have said: “at every pole there is one”; but the Brahmins have counted seven at each.

Mr. Kingsland: Counting from the equator?

Blavatsky: The seven circles which are the seven steps of Meru are the seven below—are the seven hells, as they call them.

Mr. Mead: The seven silver ones down, and the seven golden ones up.

Keightley: They divide the twenty-eight degrees from the Pole to the Arctic Circle into seven sets, each four degrees apart,

515
which is not the whole space from the equator to the pole. From 0° to 28° latitude, that space is divided into seven circles, each four degrees apart.

Mr. Kingsland: I understood HPB to say from the equator.

Blavatsky: The seven in the north and the seven in the south; not at the equator, at the poles.

Keightley: I will tell you where the expression is derived from. She is really referring to speculations by a man named Mackay.183 Where you speak about Mackay is another place in The Secret Doctrine.

Blavatsky: It is written in such a way that it leads to entirely another thing. Modern science gives one ring, or pole, and the Brahmins gave seven to the top and seven to the South Pole. The southern pole represented the seven Arakas in Patala; but their idea of hell was not our idea. There it was a place of rejoicing. When [  ] went to hell he said he never had a more pleasant time, just like one going now to the Paris Exhibition; 184 and he learned his wisdom, his astronomy there from Sesha, the serpent of eternity on which Vishnu sleeps; and that serpent gave him hospitality and taught him astronomy magnificently. That is where you ought to go and learn.

Mr. Old: I want to know something about the division of the globe by the Hindus. Do they count five of our degrees to one of theirs, making 72 degrees instead of 360? Are you counting from the equator to the pole according to our degrees?

Keightley: Yes. You know the present Arctic Circle is 28 degrees. That space they divide into spaces of four degrees each; this

516
is according to Arnold Mackey.

Blavatsky: But Mackey is perfectly wrong there. He is only right about the seven. But this fourteen is a flapdoodle, because he takes fourteen Manus, and these Manus have nothing to do with it. It is the seven steps of Meru.

Keightley: Mead has an idea in his head that these are counted from the equator. They are counted from the Pole.

Blavatsky: It is the land of bliss—and after that, when Asia was entirely formed, the last races of the Third Race, those that separated into males and females.

Mr. Kingsland: It was at that time the North Pole.

Blavatsky: It was simply the Meru, the land of bliss, the land of the gods, and you find references to this in Hesiod, where Apollo is said to go to Eternal Light and Eternal Day. It was tropical country then. Where Greenland is now you had palm trees, laurels, and I don’t know what.

Keightley: Remember this, Kingsland, that the axis of the Earth relatively to the Earth {Sun} is fixed; it has the inclination to the ecliptic.

Mr. Kingsland: The inclination you thought [  ] the tropics.

Blavatsky: All this changes twice every tropical year; everything is shifted, if you please. Every 12,500 or 12,600 years it changes.

Mr. Mead: Twice every tropical year, do you say?

Blavatsky: Yes, sir. Every 12,500 or 12,600 years.

Mr. Kingsland: Does this change take place gradually?

Blavatsky: Gradually! To what do you attribute the fact that the seas more and more encroach upon the earth? All this is that action. That there are continents that are sinking and the sea that is rising.

517
Mr. Kingsland: That is why we always get spring a month later.

Blavatsky: Twelve thousand years ago, the Earth was not as it is now.

Mr. Kingsland: I think twelve years ago it was not, either.

Blavatsky: Now it goes very rapidly. And it is time it should go and rest and give room to something better.

Mr. Mead: How much does this angle change by?

Blavatsky: This I could not tell you. I am not learned enough.

Keightley: Four degrees, I think, every sidereal year of 25,000 years.

Blavatsky: Old has studied it well.

Mr. Old: I gave it as well as I could in the [  ]. What Mackey says would agree, because there are 28 degrees to be divided.

Keightley: Question 15. “As soon as a nucleus of primordial substance in the Laya state is informed by the freed principles of a just deceased sidereal body, it becomes a comet, then a sun, then a world.” Is the term “sidereal body” used in a general sense, as applying to all bodies in cosmos, or technically, to distinguish it from a planetary body?

Blavatsky: I use the term “sidereal body” in a general sense, as applying to bodies in cosmos in general. I do not give it any technical or special signification.

Keightley: Then page 205 you have a very important note about the stages in the evolution of the cosmic bodies (Reads from Secret Doctrine.) Question 16, page 205, note. In the order of evolution of globes with respect to their material transformation, does the Laya state correspond to (1); the cometary to (4); the solar to (5)? If so, to what do (2) and (6) correspond?

Blavatsky: Now, look here. You just answer me a question

518
frankly and sincerely, as I would to a mother-in-law. Do you ask me these things because it is so obscurely put in The Secret Doctrine, or is it that you want to pump me out?

Keightley: It is for this reason, to make quite certain that we get a right basis of correspondence and analogies to go upon. Because if we get that wrong, we shall go making mistakes all through.

Blavatsky: You corroborate that statement, Mr. President?

Mr. Kingsland: I think so.

Keightley: If we once get a wrong idea, we continue to go wrong.

Blavatsky: It seems to me you want to pump me out.

Mr. Old: You don’t suspect us of wanting to know anything, do you?

Blavatsky: Yes! I do. Well, the Laya state corresponds to the atomic or ethereal, and the solar to germinal and the fiery.

Keightley: That being so, what do the second and the sixth and seventh, that is to say, the aeriform and the radiant or gaseous—well, that first.

Blavatsky: The aeriform or gaseous transformation does not write a distinct stage in the cosmic evolution; but, rather, a link connecting the homogeneous with the nebulæ or curd-like stage, a correlation of one into the other.

Mr. Mead: That is what you call matter in a critical state.

Blavatsky: Yes, sir. The fourfold vapor represents the stages through which the Earth has past {passed} to reach its present condition. The earth is materialized vapor, as ice is materialized steam. The seventh or depending stage describes the stage the Earth will reach at the end of the Seventh Round. Then men will depend on no other sustenance than their own divine natures. There will

519
be no need of food or drink; they will have no more clubs or lawn tennis, or anything. The principles of the Earth will have almost entirely left her physical body, save the upper triad, just as this Moon had done at the close of the lunar Manvantara; and its principles will be ready to shoot, each in its turn, on to a new Laya centre to form a new globe, which will {be} the Earth’s Septenary Only Begotten Son. Do you want to know anything more? You are the biggest pumpers I have seen in my life. My notes are at an end, and I open my brains to you, and you may ask what you like.

Mr. Hall: Will this new earth be constructed and worked on the same principles as the old one?

Blavatsky: Behave yourself, Hall. We had a very great philosopher in Russia, some of whose aphorisms and axioms I have been translating for Bert’s gratification, and he is called [  ] {Kozma Prutkov}. Well, [  ] {Prutkov} has got a magnificent aphorism, and he says: “Plug thy fountain, if thou hast one, because even the fountain needs a little rest.”185 That is one of the best things I have read. So I wonder when anyone of you will know when to plug your fountains and to give a little bit of rest?

Mr. Kingsland: They rest for six days; they are only open on Thursdays.

Mr. Hall: It is always leaking at other times.

Mr. Kingsland: I have got one question that has not been asked. It would appear from analogy that there should be seven chains of planets (Each consisting of seven planets—total 49.) in which humanity develops, the lunar chain being one, and our Earth chain another. Is this so, and is our chain the fourth in the series, lunar chain being the third?

Blavatsky: It may be. I am not sure of it, but I would not destroy your illusions.

520
A Lady: I thought it was good to destroy illusions.

Blavatsky: Yes, because everything is illusion on this plane of existence. I have been thinking myself about this.

Mr. Kingsland: Are the seven sacred planets, the planets which correspond to our Earth, in the above-named seven chains?

Blavatsky: No, I don’t think so. Really, I do not know. There are very few things that I know, really.

Mr. Hall: What is the meaning in the fable of Jason going to fetch the Golden Fleece, and his having to sow the Dragon’s teeth?

Blavatsky: What does he mean?

Keightley: You know, the fable of Jason and the Argonauts. One of the labors he has to undertake is to sow Dragon’s teeth. First of all he has to plow the ground with fiery bulls; then, having plowed the ground, he sows the Dragon’s teeth from which grow a crop of armed men.

Mr. Mead: Cadmus does the same.

Keightley: Hall wants to know what the interpretation is.

Blavatsky: Exercise your own imagination. You know what a “Dragon” is; I told you just now.

Mr. Hall: It was in connection with that, that I asked the question.

Blavatsky: I don’t know. I could not tell you.

Mr. Hall: Is it a symbol of initiation?

Blavatsky: I have plugged my fountain. It may be.

Mr. Mead: The armed men that spring up from the teeth Cadmus sows all fall to fighting one another.

Mr. Hall: That is only because he tricks them.

521
Mr. Mead: They straight away fall to work to fight one another.

Keightley: He throws an enchanted helmet among them.

Blavatsky: I have been on that spot,186 and if you want an interpretation of it, there are again seven legends, each relating to one of the keys.

Mr. Mead: Simon gave one in the——

Blavatsky: Take the alchemical, if you please, in connection with the expedition of the Argonauts. All alchemy is there, if you could only understand it; the philosopher’s stone and everything is in that expedition of the Argonauts, there in the Golden Fleece.

Mr. Hall: I wish I could understand why Jason deserts the deer {Medea?}.187

Blavatsky: If we begin about these allegories, we will never end.

The proceedings here closed.

