
A. Keightley: Stanza 1 continued, Sloka 3: “Universal mind was not, for there were no Ah-hi to contain it.”16 This Sloka seems to imply that the universal mind has no existence apart from the Ah-hi, but in the commentary you state that during the Pralaya, “the ‘universal mind’ remains as a permanent possibility of mental action, or as that abstract absolute thought, of which mind is the concrete relative manifestation,” and that the Ah-hi are the vehicle for divine universal thought and will. “They are the intelligent forces that give to Nature her ‘laws,’ while themselves acting according to laws imposed upon them by still higher powers…(they are) the hierarchy of spiritual beings through which the universal mind comes into action.” 17 This commentary suggests that the Ah-hi are not themselves the universal mind, but only the vehicle for its manifestation.

Blavatsky: Universal mind and absolute mind are one. Are they not? Very well, that only implies that as there are no finite differentiated minds during Pralaya, therefore it is just as though there were no mind at all, if there is nothing to contain it, or to perceive it. That is the meaning. There is nothing to reflect or contain the ideation of the absolute mind, therefore it is not, because everything outside of the absolute and immutable Sat, or the Be- ness, is necessarily finite and conditioned, since it has a beginning and end, and here is something with no beginning and no end. Therefore since the Ah-hi were not, there was no universal mind, because you must make a distinction between the absolute mind

28 
which is ever present, and its reflection in the Ah-hi at the first flutter of Manvantara. The Ah-hi are on the highest plane; they are those who reflect the universal mind collectively, and begin the work of evolution of all the lower forces until they come, throughout the seven planes, down to our lowest plane.

A. Keightley: Then the Ah-hi and the universal mind are necessary compliments of one another?

Blavatsky: Not at all. Universal mind, or absolute mind, always is, whether during Manvantara or during Pralaya; it is immutably one. But since the term Ah-hi means the highest Dhyanis—the Logoi perhaps—those which begin, which are the creation—or evolution, not creation, because everything is an emanation; since the Ah-hi were not, there was no universal mind, because it was the absolute dormant, latent mind, and it was not differentiated in the collectivity of these Dhyanis.

The President: It was, rather, absolute consciousness.

Blavatsky: It was absolute consciousness which is not consciousness. What is consciousness? Further on you make a question: “Can consciousness exist without any mind?” But it will come in time. You had better proceed, unless you have some other questions to ask. For instance, let us represent to ourselves, if you can do such a thing, that universal mind is a kind of vacuum, but vacuum with latent consciousness in it. You just suppose you pump out all the air you can from some vessel, there is a vacuum. You cannot represent yourselves in that particular vessel as a vehicle: there is the vacuum; but break these vessels that contain this soi- distant vacuum; where shall you look for it? It has disappeared, it is everywhere and nowhere. It is something, yet it is the absence of something. It is entirely a homogeneous thing. This is what is supposed to be a vacuum, I think. Dr. Williams, how would you describe vacuum?

Dr. Williams: Absolute vacuum is a figment, really.

29 
Blavatsky: It is a figment which is a negative thing. It is the supposed place where nothing exists.

Dr. Williams: It is absence of air, I should think.

Blavatsky: You break those vessels and nothing exists, therefore universal mind is not, because there are no vehicles to contain it.

A. Keightley: The first question is, can you give us a definition of the universal mind, which will solve the difficulty?

Blavatsky: Well, I think I have just done so.

A. Keightley: Quite so. Then number 2. “What are the higher powers which condition the Ah-hi?”

Blavatsky: Well I don’t call them powers at all; it is simply a manifestation of the periodical law, the universal law, which becomes by turns active or inactive. This is that law of periodical manifestation which creates them, which emanates them. I always use the word create, which is a very bad and wrong word to use, for there is no creation.

A. Keightley: Then the power, which is higher than the Ah-hi, is the law which necessitates manifestation.

Blavatsky: Just so; periodically, when the hour strikes, it comes, and they appear into manifestation. They are on the first rung of manifestation, after which it goes on gradually shaping itself more and more.

B. Keightley: It should really be THE law, and not A law.

Blavatsky: The law and not a law. I give it {to} you from the standpoint of esoteric, or eastern teaching. If physical science objects, just say so, and I will try to repent. Who of you has an objection to make?

Kingsland: The grand difficulty is to account for this law.

30 
Blavatsky: You want to go beyond even the first manifestation, beyond what they call the Supreme Cause; you want to go beyond that. You try to understand first the Supreme Cause, as they call it, and I can assure you, you won’t understand it; it is all a figment, all our imagination. We try to do the best we can, but it does not stand to reason at all. We do not even approach this absolute, this merely logical speculation which dates from thousands and thousands of years. If physical or modern science can say or invent something better, let it do so, but it has not done it yet. There are gaps and flaws everywhere, and at every moment one thing breaks its nose, and another comes, and then they jump over the wall and imagine some other speculation; that again in its turn breaks its nose, and that is all it is.

Kingsland: Would not cosmic mind be a better term than universal mind in this case?

Blavatsky: No; cosmic mind would take in the third degree. Cosmic mind is simply confined or limited to the manifested universe.

Kingsland: Quite so. In that sense it seems the passage is intended.

Blavatsky: Cosmic mind is quite a different thing from universal ideation. It is just the manifestation of that mind during the Manvantaric period of activity. But universal ideation knows no change. It was, always was, is, and will be. I never said it does not exist: it does not exist for our perception, because there were no minds to perceive it. Universal mind was not because there was no one to perceive it. One is latent and the other is active. One is a potentiality.

Kingsland: The universal mind was in the absolute, but it was cosmic mind that was not.

Blavatsky: Yes, but we speak here about manifestation. I cannot go and invent things; I am obliged to translate just as the

31 
Stanzas give it in the book.

Kingsland: That is the manifestation.

Blavatsky: Well, let us call it cosmic mind, if you like it better.

Kingsland: I only think there is a confusion between universal mind and absolute mind.

Blavatsky: If you say universal mind, it is absolute, but if you say cosmic mind, that is another thing.

Kingsland: Then you can’t say that it was not.

Blavatsky: Cosmic ideation was not, but universal mind was.

Kingsland: Quite so.

Blavatsky: How can I put that it was not? I am obliged to translate as it is, and then to give all the commentaries. I didn’t invent them. If I were inventing it, I might put it otherwise.

Kingsland: If you say universal mind was not manifested, you get over the difficulty.

Blavatsky: Those who have written this do not concern themselves with the manifested universe. This relates to the highest, and does not deal yet with the universal matter, it deals with the universe of ideation of consciousness and so on.

Kingsland: It deals with the first manifestation.

Blavatsky: You had better send your protest to those who have written this thing, because I can’t help it.

Kingsland: No, it is the English translation. Do you see what I mean, Harbottle?

The President: I see what you mean.

Mead: It is the same thing looked upon from different points of view.

32 
The President: I think we are apt to use the word cosmic as applied to the manifested universe in all its forms. This does not touch anything of the sort. This is the first absolute consciousness or non- consciousness, and I think it really does mean that the absolute consciousness could not be that universal mind because it was not to be expressed, it could not be expressed, there was no expression for it. That is what I take to be the meaning of it.

Kingsland: There was no expression for it; but it was there.

The President: It was there and it was not there.

Blavatsky: Because the Ah-hi were not, to the persons who can conceive of it; since there was nothing and no one to conceive of it, how could it be? It was not. You must remember the peculiar mode of expression used by the Easterners. They express it always allegorically, always figuratively. You cannot ask them to express in scientific language which says so much and means so little.

Kingsland: When you say it was not, you mean it was not in the absolute.

Blavatsky: I beg your pardon. I say it was not, simply.

The President: If you can say it was, that would be taking a very one-sided view of what we mean by Sat. That would be equivalent to saying that Sat was being.

Mead: I think the question hangs on the time referred to altogether. It involves the question of time, and no time then existed.

The President: I think it goes even farther back than that. I think it is all inherent in the meaning we attribute to the word Sat, which is as I say both being and non-being.

Kingsland: I don’t think there is any confusion in our minds, it is in the terms.

Blavatsky: Just read this over again, will you?

A. Keightley: “What are the higher powers which condition the

33 
Ah-hi?”

Blavatsky: No, no, not that. I mean the thing to which Kingsland takes objection.

(A. Keightley then read the passage: Secret Doctrine, Stanza 1, Sloka 3 and commentary.

Blavatsky: It ought to be higher “power” not “powers.”

Kingsland: First you say it was, and then it was not.

Blavatsky: I didn’t say that. The Absolute must be always, it is a perfect impossibility for it to be otherwise. The Absolute is a thing which must be taken tacitly. If there is such a thing as absolute something and not something, an absolute unknown or unknowable, then it must always have been and always be. It is impossible it should go out of the universe. This is a tacit assumption.

Kingsland: But if you take it as it is written there, “universal mind was not,” it treats of it as if it were a manifestation, but mind itself is not a manifestation.

Blavatsky: Mind is a manifestation, universal mind is not the same thing; let us call it an ideation. Cosmic ideation was as soon as the Ah-hi appeared and continues throughout the Manvantara. But this is universal absolute ideation, and is always and cannot get out of the universe, whereas cosmic ideation was not and the only mistake is that I did not put cosmic. But why should I? I cannot put things out of my own head; I just translate as it is. There are many, many verses that come between, that I have left out altogether. It may be this would be better.

B. Keightley: Also, I think the term cosmos is used almost throughout The Secret Doctrine in reference chiefly to the solar manifested universe, and is not taken in the sense as referring to that which precedes.

Blavatsky: I think we shall only deal with “cosmos” as

34 
our solar system. I think I say it in some place there, at least I so remember. I have a recollection that I have been writing about it.

A. Keightley: I think I see Kingsland’s objection, he means to say this expression is liable to cause a certain amount of confusion because, just as Madame Blavatsky has now expressed it, the universal mind always is and never can be. But that which is identical with what we call cosmic ideation was not, because the Ah-hi were not there to perceive it.

Blavatsky: And, as there was no manifestation, it was an impotentiality.

A. Keightley: First you say universal mind was not and then you say universal mind is always a permanent thing and always is.

Blavatsky: Because I try to explain the Stanza. I know the meaning, I know the spirit too, not the dead letter, I don’t take the dead letter; I give it as it is, and then I give the spirit of it.

Dr. Williams: Does not the expression, “universal mind,” convey, itself, that idea?
