
B. Keightley: I think it is implied in the word, “mind.”

Blavatsky: We are obliged to use it.

The President: Unless you call it consciousness.

Blavatsky: It is absolute consciousness. But it is not consciousness as we understand it.

Dr. Williams: If you get rid of all predicates, everything has been done that can be done. You say the Absolute is. If you say more than that you approach perception, and that is manifestation.

The President: You cannot attribute mind to the Absolute until you have got something capable of perception radiating from the Absolute, in which case it is correct to say that the universal mind was not.

35 
Kingsland: It is correct in one sense but creates confusion.

Blavatsky: But what can we do? Do you want to change it? Now it is printed, what can you do?

Kingsland: We cannot do anything, now it is printed.

Blavatsky: Then why do you break my heart? (Laughter)

The President: You asked him to object, really.

Blavatsky: But what can we do now? I think about 20 persons have broken their heads about it when they were preparing the thing, even the great metaphysical Fawcett,18 because I have been asking all of them. Is there anything according to Herbert Spencer19 or any of your scientists which you can object to? “No,” they said “it is perfect,” and now you find flaws! Well, let us pass on.

A. Keightley: “To what cosmic plane do the Ah-hi here spoken of belong?”

Blavatsky: To the first, the second, and the third. Because it is a triad, a manifested triad, a reflection of the non-manifested. Taking the triad in the sense that Pythagoras gives it, it disappears in the darkness and the silence. Taken in this sense it is the only thing, as there is Atma, Buddhi, Manas—well, all, the first, second and third planes—the Ah-hi belong to these planes.

A. Keightley: That is to say the Ah-hi belong to the cosmic planes which correspond to Atma, Buddhi, Manas.

Blavatsky: Just so, they correspond.

B. Keightley: Then this question cannot arise, that Atma,

36 
Buddhi, Manas——

Blavatsky: I know, the two are on the same plane.

B. Keightley: They are successive emanations; you get the Atma, Buddhi in man, before Manas makes its appearance.

Blavatsky: But we do not speak of man now, if you please, we speak in general that these correspond. Don’t you go and mix up man with it now. We speak of the macrocosm simply, at the beginning when there was the first flutter of Manvantaric dawn, and then evolution begins.

B. Keightley: The question I want to put exactly is this: Are those three planes simultaneous emanations or do they emanate one from the other?

Blavatsky: I suppose one from another, but I could not tell you that. Don’t ask me questions I cannot answer.

B. Keightley: That is the question that is now meant here.

Blavatsky: Do you really want to apply mechanical law to cosmogony as it is in the metaphysical minds of the Orientals? You won’t get much if you come to apply space and time because there was no space and no time, so how can you ask me this question?

B. Keightley: Well, then, that settles the question.

Blavatsky: After this comes the question of the reflection of the triad in space and time, therefore, how can you apply anything mechanical?

B. Keightley: That is what I wanted you to say. I got what I wanted.

A. Keightley: Question 4. “Have these Ah-hi been men in previous Manvantaras or will they become so?”

Blavatsky: They will become men in subsequent Manvantaras.

37 
A. Keightley: Then do they remain permanently on this very exalted plane during the whole period of the Manvantara?

Blavatsky: Of the 15 figures?20 No, they pass through all the planes until they become on the third plane Manasaputra, the sons of Manas or mind. They are arupa. On the highest plane these Ah-hi are arupa, that is to say formless, bodiless, without any substance, without anything, they are breaths. On the 2nd plane they first approach to rupa or to form. Then on the third they become Manasa-rupa, those who become incarnated in men.

A. Keightley: Then is that stage taken in one Manvantara or are those various stages?

Blavatsky: It is. It is all the same thing, only a distinction is made. On every plane they reach they are called by other names.

A. Keightley: Quite so.

Blavatsky: There is more and more differentiation because what we talk about is the homogeneous substance, which we call substance from our conceit, because it cannot be any substance which we can conceive of. Later they become substance, if you like.

A. Keightley: Then the Ah-hi of this Manvantara——

Blavatsky: They do not exist any more, if you please. They have become long ago [  ].21 Read The Secret Doctrine, you will see the thing there.

A. Keightley: I understood you to say they did not become men in this Manvantara.

Blavatsky: The 15 figures apply to the solar system. The first answers relate to the beginning of the whole objective universe, but after that, when you begin to speak about the Father-Mother, then it

38 
relates to our objective universe and to the solar system only because our teaching does not busy itself at all with things outside. At least those things that I have selected. I could not go and select the whole thing. I have only taken that which relates to our solar system. I have just taken two or three just to show the general idea, and then skipped over whole Stanzas and came to the point. I have said there are some 60 Stanzas passed over. I would have had compliments from the Daily News if I had translated the whole of it.

B. Keightley: Then on the re-awakening, will the men of one Manvantara have to pass through a similar stage to the Ah-hi stage in the next Manvantara?

Blavatsky: In many, many Manvantaras at the end of the tail of the serpent; when the tail will be in the mouth of the serpent, I might say. What have you got the ambition of becoming? An Ah- hi, or what? You will have time, my dear fellow, to do many things before you become an Ah-hi.

A. Keightley: “A man can choose what he shall think about, can the analogy be applied to Ah-hi?”

Blavatsky: No, because a man has free will and the Ah-hi have no free will. They have a collective will. They are obliged to act simultaneously. It is one law that gives them the impulse and they have to act just according to that law. I do not call it free will. Free will can exist only in man, in a man who has a mind with consciousness, which acts and makes him perceive things not only within himself but outside himself also. These Ah-hi simply are forces; you don’t take them to be men, do you? They are not human beings.

A. Keightley: No, but I take them to be conscious agents in the work.

Blavatsky: Conscious in so far that they act within the universal consciousness. The Manasaputra is a different thing when they come on the third plane.

Hall: Can the Ah-hi be said to be enjoying bliss?

39 
Blavatsky: Why should they enjoy bliss or enjoy non-bliss? What have they done to do so? I don’t think they enjoy anything of the kind. They cannot smoke cigarettes, even, when they like. Why should they enjoy bliss? What extraordinary ideas you have! You can enjoy bliss only when you have known what suffering is.

Hall: I was making a distinction in my mind between bliss and happiness.

Blavatsky: I thought it was the same thing; you can have neither happiness nor bliss if you have not known suffering and pain.

Hall: I was thinking of bliss as the state of the Absolute.

Blavatsky: You suppose the Absolute is bliss? The Absolute can have no condition, no attribute, nothing at all. The Absolute is conditionless; that is the first thing to learn about the Absolute. It is only that which is finite and differentiated which can have some attribute or something of the kind.

Dr. Williams: How can they be said to be conscious intelligences in as much as intelligence is such a complex thing?

Blavatsky: Because the English language does not furnish us with a better word. I admit the word is very inadequate, but the English language is not the Sanskrit language. If it were written in Sanskrit you would not find a single objection, but what can you do with the English language or any other European language?

Dr. Williams: There may not be one word, but I should think a collection of words would express anything.

Blavatsky: Oh, then try, if you please, to do so!

Dr. Williams: It seems to me from what I can gather from your elucidation that it really means a force which is a unity, not a complex action and reaction of several forces—which would be implied in the word intelligence or anything which implies complexity—but rather it is that simple force, almost. The noumenal, the aspect of

40 
phenomenal force, would at least express better what is meant by that.

Blavatsky: Well, I don’t know. You take one flame and represent yourselves a flame and it will be unity; but the rays which will proceed from that flame, they will become complex and do all kinds of things and will be seen to act each one on its own line.

Dr. Williams: But they only become complex when they find receptacles in lower forms.

Blavatsky: Just what they do find. The lower they descend the more they find it. But it is all one; it is simply the rays which proceed from one; and more and more do they proceed to differentiate until they become fully conditioned and fall down here in this world of ours, with its thousands and millions of inhabitants—as Carlyle22 said, “most of them fools.”

Dr. Williams: Well, the Ah-hi, then, considered as a primary essence, would be a unity.

Blavatsky: Certainly, because they proceed from unity. It is the first of the seven rays, as they call it.

A. Keightley: Then they are the reflection of unity.

Blavatsky: What are the prismatic rays, if you please, if not one single white ray? From the one they become three, from the three they become seven, because there is a prismatic scale of colours.

A. Keightley: Seven, but they are still one when they are moving rapidly over each other.

Blavatsky: To our perception, quite so. They become seven just in the same way, there if you please take the analogy.

A. Keightley: Next question. You say that during deep sleep “mind is not” on the material plane; but it is implied that during this period mind is active on another plane. Can you give us a definition

41 
of the characteristics which distinguish mind in the waking state from mind during the sleep of the body?

Blavatsky: Well, I suppose there is a great difference between the two. You see, the reason in higher minds sleeps, but the instinctual mind is awakened. That is the difference. The reason of the higher mind, in the physical man, is not always the same. Today I have been looking at a book and I learnt at last the great difference between cerebrum and cerebellum. I was always mixing them up in my mind, I was not sure of them, and this morning I on purpose went to look and I at last learnt that this is the cerebellum (pointing to the head) and this the cerebrum. The one sleeps when the other is awake, and if you ask an astrologer, he will give you a magnificent idea. I don’t know where it is stated, but the brain is all in 7, and he separated them and put all the planets that answer to those portions. Now here you will find the earth, the sun, and the moon, here at the back of the head; and this part sleeps and rests when the other is awake.

A. Keightley: Then what do you mean by instinctual mind?

Blavatsky: You see, it passes from a plane which we regard as an illusion. Now, for instance, this plane in which we are proceeding is called reality; we call it illusion, but we say that this part going to sleep, and this part of the brain having no more a definite function, it is the other one that begins and carries away man on the Astral—which is still more deceptive, because it is all the emanations of everything that is bad. It preserves no record. The great serpent, it is called. Now if the higher mind sleeps there you will have a perception of the dreams and you can bring back when you awake the recollection of them—this pretence of dreams, but I think we have been discussing dreams quite enough—and unless it is that, you will have all these chaotic dreams because you have all these dreams with this peculiar part of your brain, the cerebellum.

B. Keightley: One thing that question was meant to cover was this: for instance, the fundamental conditions of the mind in the waking state are space and time.

42 
Blavatsky: Yes.