

B. Keightley: Do they exist for the Manas, the mind, during the sleep of the physical body?

Blavatsky: No.

B. Keightley: So there you get at any rate one very marked distinction between the manifestation of man on the two planes of consciousness.

Blavatsky: There may be something approximate, some hallucination of space and time; but certainly it is nothing real. We have been talking about it many times, and have seen that in one second you may live through the events of thirty years, as some dreams prove to you. Therefore there is no conception, no possibility of conceiving of division of time.

B. Keightley: Or of space.

Blavatsky: They are both in duration or eternity; they are not in time.

A. Keightley: Next question: It has been stated that Manas (mind) is the vehicle of Buddhi, but the universal mind has been spoken of as Maha Buddhi. Can you define for us the distinction between Manas and Buddhi as applied in a universal sense, and Manas and Buddhi as manifested in man?

Blavatsky: Well, cosmic Buddhi is the vehicle of Mahat, that is to say, in the sense of Buddhi being Prakriti and this is Prakriti; at least it descends in the seven planes, that is the difference, and the Buddhi of man proceeds from the highest Akasa. He does not go on the highest plane until he comes to the most objective plane. Maha-Buddhi is used there in the same sense as Prakriti in its seven manifestations.

B. Keightley: But is the vehicle of Mahat, the universal mind? Does the Manas in man proceed from the universal mind too?

43 
Blavatsky: Yes it proceeds from Akasa—Buddhi, I mean, or Manas. The Manasa-Dhyanis are the same Ah-hi I just told you of on a lower plane.

B. Keightley: Because, of course, one would naturally think, as Mahat is the universal mind, that Manas in man proceeds from the universal mind.

Blavatsky: It is just the same Prakriti in its last manifestation. It is what in the Kabalah is called Malkuth, the Bride of Heavenly Man—well, earth, everything earthly, or atomic.

B. Keightley: i.e., the plane of objective consciousness, in fact, waking consciousness.

A. Keightley: Question 8. “Can there be consciousness without mind?”

Blavatsky: There we come to the great question. Consciousness—what is it? It is only the faculty of the mind, is not it? It is that which permeates the mind or the Ego, and causes it to perceive that such a mind has action, that such a thing is so—is not that it? How do you explain it otherwise? Consciousness is not a thing per se. It is a faculty of the mind. That is what Hamilton will tell you and what all the Eastern idealists will tell you. They cannot tell you anything else. It is a thing inseparable from mind—unless it is the mind of an idiot, of course you won’t have any consciousness.

A. Keightley: You say the fashion now-a-days amongst philosophers is to speak slightingly—

Blavatsky: We know that, of course.

A. Keightley:—of the idea of making mind an entity.

Blavatsky: Of course, but mind is still the soul. It is perfectly synonymous with soul. Those who don’t believe in soul certainly will tell you that there is no such thing as consciousness apart from brain, and once the brain is dead and the man is dead, there is no

44 
consciousness. The Nihilists, the Atheists and the Materialists will tell you so. If you believe in mind, mind is the soul or the Ego. What kind of a soul is that if it has not any consciousness?

A. Keightley: But they accept consciousness.

Blavatsky: But not after the death of man, while we accept consciousness after death, and say the real consciousness and the real freedom of the Ego or the soul begins only after the physical death of man. It is then that it is no longer impeded by terrestrial matter that it is free, that it can perceive everything.

A. Keightley: Because they confine their consciousness to the sense of perception.

Blavatsky: That is what they do, and we don’t. It is the difference between us.

Hall: When you say the physical death of man, do you mean the permanent death?

Blavatsky: What other death is there for a man?

Hall: I don’t know whether it is the fact that you meant us to take it that after each death the soul is free and can proceed without being hampered by the body.

Blavatsky: You make a too subtle distinction. What is it you are talking about?

Hall: If you mean when a man ceases to incarnate, that is another thing.

Blavatsky: When does he cease? When he becomes Nirvanee, when you are dead and no Hall will exist any more, but your Ego will. The Roger Hall will have become one of the dresses that your Ego has thrown off to assume another in a certain time.

Hall: But then why should the Ego be anymore able to perceive things than it is at present?

45 
Blavatsky: Because it is not impeded by matter, by gross matter. Can you see what is behind that door unless you are a clairvoyant? There, there is no impediment of matter and the soul sees everything. It goes into Devachan, its own place, and afterwards it must reincarnate. But there are cases when they don’t go into Devachan, that is what we are fools enough to believe in.

Hall: It would not apply to every physical death.

Blavatsky: We do not speak about exceptions, they only prove the rule; we speak about the average death.

B. Keightley: There is a moment of freedom of that mind, I take it, between the actual death and the time when the Ego proceeds to the Devachanic state.

Blavatsky: We can only go by analogies. When I am dead, I will come and tell you, if I can. I do not think I will, but there are others who have been in trances, which is just as good as death, and there are those yogis who were, for instance, 40 days buried.

Hall: Those yogis are exceptions.

Blavatsky: There, consciousness can live and the body is—I do not say dead, but any doctor will tell you, it is dead.

Hall: But all these are exceptions. I was asking whether it applied to every physical death, because if at the ordinary physical death of ordinary man his Ego must go along of itself, then it is not impeded in Devachan by the illusory bliss as it is by the illusory matter.

Blavatsky: Don’t let us mix up these things or we will never end here.

A. Keightley: Then we come to the 4th Sloka. “The 7 ways to bliss were not. The great causes of misery (Nidana and Maya) were not.” The question is, what are the 7 ways to bliss?

Blavatsky: Well, they are practically faculties, of which you

46 
will know more later on, perhaps, if you go a little deeper into esotericism.

A. Keightley: Then the 7 ways are not actually mentioned?

Blavatsky: No, they are not mentioned in The Secret Doctrine, are they? They are not, I should say not.

A. Keightley: I don’t think they are. Then the question is: “Are the 4 truths of the Hinayana School the same as the 4 truths mentioned by Edwin Arnold in his book The Light of Asia?”23

Blavatsky: Almost the same. He mentions something which is somewhat different from it.

A. Keightley: The first is of sorrow, the 2nd is of sorrow’s cause, the 3rd of sorrow’s ceasing and the 4th is the way.

Blavatsky: What do you understand by Edwin Arnold’s explanation?

B. Keightley: Read the passage please, Arch. (A. Keightley then read the passage indicated, The Light of Asia.)

Blavatsky: All this is theological and all this exoteric; this is what you can find in all the volumes that any Buddhist priest will give you; but there is far more explanation, of course, in Aryasanga’s24 works, though that is the esoteric too. Arnold took it from the Singhalese Buddhism.

A. Keightley: Then do these four truths: the first of sorrow, the second of sorrow’s cause, the third sorrow ceasing and the fourth the way, do they represent the four noble truths esoterically?

47 
Blavatsky: Yes, I think they do. You will find Buddhism all about them.

B. Keightley: What do they really stand for?

Blavatsky: It would take too long and it has no relevancy to this Sloka. It would take much too long. It is impossible to tell you now. It would take several evenings to explain to you one of them thoroughly.

The President: Then we will put them down for the future.

B. Keightley: I am not sure it would not be a profitable thing to take up next time.

Blavatsky: I am not sure that it would be. You had better follow the Slokas. You are not going to follow that, because the four noble truths meant one thing for the priests of the yellow robes, and meant different things to the mystics. The one acts on the dead letter, just the same as our priests will act on the canons of the Church, and the mystics have got nothing to do with it.

A. Keightley: Can you give us any idea for the moment?

Blavatsky: I cannot, I am not an exoteric Buddhist. Ask Olcott. 25 He is the man to know all these things. He is a very pious Buddhist and I am not. I am nothing pious.

A. Keightley: Then I put this question now, “Is the eightfold path the same as the 7 ways to bliss?”

Blavatsky: Yes.

A. Keightley: “Are Nidana and Maya the (great causes of misery) aspects of the absolute?”

Blavatsky: Is that number 4?

48 
A. Keightley: That is number 4.

Blavatsky: Now what can Nidana, I ask myself, and Maya have to do with each other? Nidana means the concatenation of cause and effect. The twelve Nidanas are the enumeration of the chief causes which produce material for Karma to strike you very heavily. Maya is simply an illusion. Now what has Nidana to do with Maya? I cannot understand what analogy, what idea one has in common with the other. If you take the universe as an illusion, a Maya, then certainly the Nidanas as being in the universe are included in the Maya, but apart from that, what has one thing to do with the other?

B. Keightley: Then why do you class them together in that way?

Blavatsky: They are two distinct things. Maya is an illusion. You think yourself a very grand fellow, that you can go and compete with any Ah-his, and any of the [  ]. But you make a fool of yourself and then comes Nirvana and shows it to you. It is just then, I think, that the man cannot take into his own head that he is not separate from the one and he goes and thinks himself a very great man in his own individuality, and he is nothing at all. He is still one in reality. It is nothing but Maya, an illusion; but taking this Maya, it is illusion or ignorance that brings us to commit all the acts which awaken the Nidanas, which produce the first cause of Nidana; this cause having been produced, the effects follow and there is Karma. Of course Nidanas and the production of bad Karmic effects and Maya are at the root of every evil. If we knew what we are we would not do such things. Everyone of us thinks he or she is a unit and something very grand in the eyes of all the authorities upstairs that you may think of; we are simply a drop of water in the ocean, not to be distinguished from another drop in the ocean, that is all we are. This sense of separateness is at the root of all evil. You know, there is no correspondence, no analogy, except the one I gave just now.

{The} President: The only possible analogy is that they both of them are synonymous with manifestation, inasmuch as there cannot be any manifestation without the production of Nidanas on the one

49 
hand and Maya on the other.
