

Mr. Old: The first question this evening is: Jiva is sometimes used as synonymous with Prana, or simply “life”; but it appears also to be used in the plural as synonymous with the Monads, and in some other senses in the Commentary onscrofula this and the following sloka. Please throw a little more light on the meaning of the word “Jivas” in The Secret Doctrine.

Blavatsky: Well, I said many times that there are six schools of philosophy in India; each school has its own terms, and uses them sometimes in a different sense. What a Vedantin of the Vishishtadvaita sect will call “Jiva,” that, for instance, the Advaita, also belonging to the Vedantin school, will say is a great heresy, because they call “Jiva” “One,” which cannot be plural—that is to say, which is Parabrahm; it is the one universal principle. Therefore, it is very difficult to know which to use, and you must know in the light of what philosophy you use it, otherwise there will always be confusion. “Jiva” is really the incarnating ego, the fifth principle, in our school, in the esoteric school.

Mr. Kingsland: Jivas in the plural are very often used for the Monads.

Blavatsky: No, you cannot use Monad, because Monad is one thing and Jiva is another. If you take Atma-Buddhi-Manas, then, it will be another thing; but, if you use them in distinction, it is impossible to say that, because Monad is Atma, what is Monad?

550 
Mr. Kingsland: It appears often to be used there in the same sense.

Blavatsky: The Monad is from Greek, “One,” the unit, whatever it is; if we call it Monad, it is simply because it is with Buddhi; and that Atma in reality is not a unit, but the one universal principle, and it is simply a ray. That which uses Buddhi as a vehicle is that ray of that universal principle, therefore, in reality it is Buddhi which is the Monad, the one unit.

Mr. Kingsland: The Monad. But it is used in reference to the Monad in the lower forms of life.

Blavatsky: That is a different thing. Leibniz uses it in quite a different way.

Mr. Kingsland: But, is not it used there in the same sense as in The Secret Doctrine?

Blavatsky: The Monad is that which incarnated in {the} Chhaya, in the image, in the first image projected by the Lunar Pitris; but, it is perfectly senseless, because it has not got the cementing link, so to say, the Manas which comes after that, one comes in the First Race, and the other in the Third, so you see the difference.

Mr. Old: In reading through The Secret Doctrine I have been led to conclude that Jiva was always used in the sense of the individual life principle.

Blavatsky: You must pay attention to what part of the book it is used in, and when. For instance, if you see that I quote something there from some sectarian book, then it will be a different thing; or if I quote Leibniz, I will say the “Monads”; but I don’t think you will find that it is used simply when I speak from my own philosophy, that I mix them up, because it is impossible to mix up the two.

Mr. Old: May we conclude, then, that Jiva is the individual expression, and Prana the universal?

Blavatsky: Prana is simply physical life, that in which animals

551
and men and all the animal kingdom and the vegetable kingdom are; but Jiva can only be applied to the one universal principle, that is to say, the unknowable Parabrahm. Prana is the Sanskrit for the life principle. There are no “Pranas,” for you cannot use it in the plural. Life is indivisible; but it is used sometimes as a synonym for Jiva, when Jiva is applied to the one life or the universal living essence—another term for the unknowable, yet self-manifesting and evident principle, the first emanation, or that which you ordinarily call the first Logos—not the second, the manifestation from the one universal.

Mr. Kingsland: Are not the Jivas synonymous with what are called the “Devourers,” later on in the stanza?

Blavatsky: Every life has a Jiva in it. Every little insect has a Jiva. Every microbe, every speck of dust will have its Jiva, but that is a different thing. “Jivas” mean “the lives.”

Mr. Kingsland: That is identical with Leibniz’ idea of the Monads.

Blavatsky: Yes, well, but it is not that. It can be called the same. The Monads of Leibniz are quite a different thing. In one sense it is, because Leibniz calls the Monads, every atom; so there is a great difference.

Mr. Old: Whether your Monad has intelligence or not, of course it has a sentient intelligence of its own, peculiar to its degree.

Blavatsky: There is a great difference between Monad, a unit, like an atom, and a Monad which is an intelligent Monad. Such a one as reflects the whole universe is the Monad of Leibniz. One is on the plane of manifestation, and of gross matter, and the other is on the plane of pure spirituality. The two planes are quite different. You take the two, and at one end of the pole is pure spirit and at the other pole there is the gross matter. So you see you cannot mix it up. You must always see in what sense it is used. One is the Unknowable, as I say, and the other is what I have said. This is a mistake which is very often made.

552 
Mr. Old: Question 2. You speak of the Unknowable. “Is the Unknowable of Occultism the same as the Unknowable of {Herbert} Spencer?”

Blavatsky: Well, that is just what I want to tell you, because there is a very great difference. It is not. Herbert Spencer’s “Unknowable” is that which we Occultists would simply call the “unknown,” or that first invisible and intangible, yet logically necessary, existing principle which some call the first cause. Now, the Unknowable of Herbert Spencer is that which he calls the first cause, and we would never call the first cause, but the first Logos. We do not call Parabrahm the first cause, because Parabrahm is the all-cause, the universal cause, or the causeless cause, which is quite a different thing. The first cause has a cause preceding it, and from which it emanates. The causeless cause has no cause, because it is the Absolute Cause itself. The Unknowable or Parabrahm of the Vedantin philosophy cannot manifest, since it is Absolute, hence the immutable; it can undergo no change whatever. To understand this Occult doctrine one would do well to study critically the quarrel between Harrison, the Positivist,204 with Herbert Spencer, in regard to this term. Now, as I understand it, Unknowable, which to Harrison means Unknown—has anyone of you read this thing between Harrison and Herbert Spencer?

Mr. Burrows: Yes.

Blavatsky: So you know it then. You will tell me, if you please, if it is as I understand it. The “Unknowable” Harrison would replace by the word “Unknown.” Neither Spencer nor Harrison makes this abstract doctrine any clearer by their discussion and coined terms, for both of them are right, and both are wrong. It is as if one insisted that the diurnal period of 24 hours should be termed day, and the other would insist upon calling it night; it is both a day and a night that make up in our perception that period, and one without the other would at once become meaningless. It is both the Unknowable

553
and the Unknown. If then you blend together the Unknowable of Herbert Spencer and the Unknown of Harrison, the sum total will give you a relative idea of what we Occultists mean by the term, and why the words Jiva, Prana, Monad—the latter in its universal application of aggregate—are in reality all one; but yet on this plane of manifestation we are obliged to differentiate them and give a name to each and not mix them up. Now, Herbert Spencer thinks that the final aim and expression of the deific idea is an unconditioned and illimitable absoluteness, and he is right. For us there exists only one absolute certitude, viz. this: that the human spirit or consciousness finds itself constantly, uninterruptedly in the presence of infinite and eternal energy, whence emanates—or rather, radiates—all that which exists, or is. Is the idea of Herbert Spencer this?

Mr. Burrows: Yes, in the main.

Blavatsky: This is then the Unknowable, and this contains more than a simple negation. It is the confession of our human ignorance; but also the tacit or virtual admission that within man there is that which feels that energy which is the universal substance; it is fabric, so to speak. Now, Spencer repeats very often that Unknowable is that energy which manifests itself simultaneously in the universe, and in our consciousness, and that it is the highest existing reality, only concealed in the ever-changing progress of physical manifestation; and yet spirit for Herbert Spencer is simply the invisible cosmic cause of these phenomena. As I understand him he does not see in spirit anything more. He attributes to this essence, as we do, unity, homogeneity, and a limitless existence outside space and time, whose means of activity are universal laws. We say so, too, but we add that above that essence and plurality of the laws whose manifestations are only periodical, there is the one eternal law, the causeless cause, as we call it. Spencer places the Unknowable face to face with the abstract and the cosmic phenomena, and sees in this Unknowable the cause of the manifestation. The Positivist, on the other hand, while admitting the existence of a certain fundamental or basic energy, speaks, nevertheless, of the Unknowable as being

554 
simply a negative quantity, which is a contradiction in terms. Now, you understand the idea. One calls it the Unknowable, and the other the Unknown. It is positively a contradiction in terms, and both mean quite a different thing; and yet, the same thing. Because Herbert Spencer calls that which we would call the First Logos—or the first manifestation, the radiation from the eternal—he calls it the first cause; and then he speaks about the Unknowable. The other one speaks of the Unknown and wants to make of the Unknown the Parabrahm. You understand? But the Parabrahm {is} entirely unconsciousness, that is to say, a negative quantity, as he calls it. Now, what we Occultists say is that neither Spencer nor Harrison offers anything like a complete philosophy. The Unknowable or the Unknown could not exist for our perceptions, nor could our perceptions for it. It is the Unknown, or the Invisible manifesting the Logos, which we place face to face with every phenomenon—abstract, physical, psychic, mental, or spiritual—because the Unknown will always contain in itself some portion of the Unknowable, that is to say, some of the laws and manifestations which elude our perception for a time. On the other hand, Unknowable, being the sum of all that which owing to our finite intellectual organization may elude forever our perceptions, is the Parabrahm, or the causeless cause. Now, if I have succeeded in making myself understood, then I say if you study Spencer’s Unknowable, and take Harrison’s Unknown, instead of accepting either one or the other, seeing the necessary complements of each one life, then our one abstract Monad, and our one universal Prana, whose eternal, immutable, causeless cause is our Vedantic Parabrahm at one end of the line, and the great being, the human race or humanity at the other, then you will have the true idea of what the Occultists mean. You see it is this humanity and each unit in it which are, at one and the same time, the Unknowable, the Unknown, and the To-Be-Known. This is what Occultism says: as it is impossible for the human mind to know anything definite even of the unknown essence, so let us turn our whole attention to its highest manifestation on earth, mankind, and say as is said in John: “In it we live and move and have our being”—“Illo vivicuus

555
movemur et sumus”.205

Mr. Old: There is one point that I don’t quite understand—perhaps it is not understandable—but that was that the Unknowable could not differentiate.

Blavatsky: I should say it could not, if it is the Absolute.

Mr. Old: But that Absolute, as the Absolute, is this, and that, and everything.

Blavatsky: Yes.

Mr. Old: Well, we are a differentiation, certainly; we are the being in that non-being. Humanity is the being, the one end of the line of life, and Parabrahm is at the other, and yet Parabrahm comprehends them both. He is not only the centre, but the radius and also the limitless circumference; it looks like a contradiction in terms.

Blavatsky: I will say, if you please, the Absolute cannot differentiate. You don’t take the philosophical idea. You cannot say in philosophy that the Absolute differentiates, that the unconditioned has any relation whatever to the conditioned, or the finite; the infinite can have no relation to it. So you cannot, in thinking about cosmos, or the universe in its manifestations—perhaps you may use your argument—you cannot, if you talk pure philosophy and Vedantin philosophy, fix it up and say the Absolute can differentiate.

Mr. Old: Of course I see in the true idea of absolute being is lost in non-being.

Blavatsky: We say that Parabrahm is perfect, absolute unconsciousness. By saying that it is absolute unconsciousness, we say it is absolute consciousness. Now, can you imagine absolute consciousness? The Vedantins will. If it is absolute unconsciousness, it must be absolute consciousness; but, as it is absolute, it can have

556 
no relation to the finite consciousness or to finite unconsciousness. Do try and understand that difference. You see those enormously difficult and abstruse ideas in the Occult philosophy.

Mr. Old: I think it is high reasoning, which our language scarcely portrays at all.

Blavatsky: Herbert Spencer has tried it, and made a mess of it, because he takes the Unknowable for a kind of transcendental first cause, which appears a little less than anthropomorphic. It is simply invisible, and he does not give it a personality. I don’t think that he is at all a Vedantic philosopher.

Mr. Old: I believe that the pure idea can be conceived, but I do not think it can be expressed.

Blavatsky: Everyone must feel it, certainly. Let me tell you, and perhaps it will help you. The Unknowable, as absoluteness, is eternal, immutable; had neither beginning, nor will it have an end. The Unknowable, as a manifestation, is periodical. The one is immutable, outside of space and time; the other is finite, because it is periodical—that is why the Parabrahmic period or the Manvantaric period is separated or divided into days of Brahmâ and nights of Brahmâ. The days are the periods of activity, in which this periodical manifestation, or the Unknowable manifested, puts in an appearance; and the night of Brahmâ is a period when everything merges in this one non-entity. Now, when the age of Brahmâ has finished the hundred years—which are not our human hundred years, but which it takes about 17 or 18 figures to express, milliards and milliards, I think about 17 milliards {15 figures}206—then it is a period which will take as many years as it took years of activity. Do you understand this division? The Unknowable is always the absolute unknowable, the abstract unknowable, or what Harrison calls the negative quantity—which, for our perceptions, it may be.

Mr. Old: Then you might say that the unknown is, in reality, that

557
which is to be known.

Blavatsky: The unknown cannot be; because the unknown has always some potentiality of the unknowable in it, whereas the unknowable cannot have such a potentiality.

Mr. Old: But I, like yourself, distinguish here between the words “unknown” and “unknowable.” I should call Herbert Spencer’s first cause “unknown.”

Blavatsky: Harrison is perfectly right. But, don’t you call it Unknowable, because that is what we call Parabrahm.

Mr. Kingsland: It is the difference between Brahmâ and Parabrahm.

Mr. Old: Question 3. In reference to the whole of paragraph (e), and to some points which were raised last Thursday, it would be as well to devote a little more time to the subject of reincarnation. And then there are several clauses which I think it would be well to read separately. Unfortunately, the paragraph is omitted.

Mr. Kingsland: “The fourth order are substantial entities, etc.” (Reads paragraph e.) { The Secret Doctrine I:218}

Mr. Old: (a) For example, we have been accustomed to think of the “Imperishable Jivas,” or “Monads,” as the Atma-Buddhi-Manas (exoterically), and that this “Monad” incarnates at some period or other in the newly-born child—not, however, fully incarnating until seven years after birth.

Blavatsky: I told you that “Imperishable Monads” are not at all what you think. It is that which I have told you already, that the “Imperishable Jivas” are the incarnating individualities, not personalities; and they are not the Monads. The Monads take immediate possession of the astral images, the Chhaya of the Lunar Pitris; the Jivas or Manasaputra, only at the end of the Third Race. With the child it is just as it is with the First Race. The Monads, Atma-Buddhis, are said to have fully incarnated only when full consciousness is developed in the child mankind—that is to say,

558 
the Third Race—and so it is with the child unit, or man. Take always analogy, then you will find invariably the key to the occult explanation. As it is with the First Race to the Third Race, so it is with the child, because the child is microcosmos of the macrocosm, and it repeats, stage by stage, everything. The whole evolution of the universe is found in the evolution of the fetus and of the child. That is a well-known fact, which the Occultists ought to know, more or less.

Mr. Old: Then you say that the Monad does not incarnate.

Blavatsky: The Monad incarnates the Monad, so to say, of a shadow. It is not united, because Chhaya—or this image, the astral form—is not conscious of the presence of the Monad, because there is no Manasic element to appreciate or to be conscious of that Monad in it. Therefore, it is just as though he did not have it. So it is with the child.

Mr. Old: It is merely the vehicle of the individual life.

Blavatsky: Nothing else. But when the Manas comes, or the mind, then there is the union of all the principles, and all the principles appear all about between seven and eight years when the child becomes conscious.

Mr. Old: Manas is a connecting link. Then (b). It was suggested by Mr. Sinnett last Thursday, and also apparently by the paragraph before us, that the Monad is really necessary as a potentiality denominating, and being in fact the “germ” which causes the development of the entity from the germinal cell onwards. But can we really say that the Devachanic entity or upper triad has anything to do, as an entity, with the purely physical evolution of that form in which it will presently incarnate? Are not the four lower principles derived entirely from the parent and following broadly what we usually call heredity? And may we not say that this affects the four lower, but not the three higher principles?

Blavatsky: Now, I will try to answer you seriatim. Mr. Sinnett

559
probably calls Monad that which we call the image, Chhaya, unless he misunderstood the teaching—which I don’t think, because he understood it well. And I think you misunderstood Mr. Sinnett. He did not say this about the Monad, because it is the first thing that is taught, that the Monad does not come but at a certain stage of the life of the child—the Buddhi, especially.

Mr. Old: He has prescribed that seven years in his Esoteric Buddhism.

Blavatsky: The germinal cell contains the seed or astral form only. The father plants the seed in the soil of matter. This seed is like a flame without wick or fuel: it neither decreases nor increases, and whether he has one or a hundred children, each of these children will be like a rush candle207 to which was imparted a light from the same inexhaustible flame. There is a thing which goes for millions and millions, from the time when mankind began. It all passes from father to son, from father to son, and so on. You understand the meaning, and certainly it cannot decrease.

Mr. Old: But for how many principles is the human parent responsible?

Blavatsky: I will tell you all this which is written here. The Monad overshadows the fetus only in the seventh month, and enters fully the child after he reaches consciousness. The Devachanic entity envelops, so to speak, the new entity, lights it up, but begins its process of assimilation only after the first ray of consciousness, say at seven or eight months, then it does not enter it, it begins to overshadow it, it is there, it is led by Karmic law to it, but it cannot enter immediately. It is perfect nonsense to say the child has a soul, and is a human being before it is born.

Mr. Kingsland: Then it is attracted by the astral shadow?

Blavatsky: Just in the same way.

Mr. Old: It is rather dangerous against the law of infanticide.

560 
Blavatsky: It cannot be taught to the masses and the people. But unfortunately the Hindus know it, and therefore they get rid of their children very easily. But this is certainly Karma. But whether the child has got a will or not, it is a human being, and there are other laws in the code of philosophy which prevent infanticide; that will always be a crime. From the parents the child receives only the astral and physical bodies and the Kama-rupa, the animal soul. It receives life from no one. It does not receive life from father or mother; it is born, and therefore it is in life. I ask you, do you receive the ocean? Can it be said that you receive the ocean when you bathe in it, or does the sponge receive it? You and the sponge have your being, and that ocean because you are in its waters. Now, suppose that the waters penetrated you entirely, that is life, the water. The child receives life from no one, the life is there, it is the universal principle. Of course, science will tell you it is nothing of the kind. It is nonsense, that life is not an entity. Life is just that deity of which we know nothing.

Mr. Old: You think the physical parents have the power of focusing this life and bringing it into distinct channels.

Blavatsky: The form is made which, as soon as it is born, receives, or as soon as it begins developing, receives life; just the same as you breathe air unconsciously. Nobody gives you the air that you breathe. Without air you would die, that is all.

Mr. Old: Then you really mean to say that the endowment of life is the result of certain physical development which has led up to that stage when the reception of life is a necessity.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. You are born, you are formed to come into being, and you live because life is there. You are in life. When you die, it is not that life leaves you; you are in the life. It is you who leave the life, and not life that leaves you.

Mr. Kingsland: Life begins to function and manifest through you.

Blavatsky: And once that your organs are destroyed, it won’t

561
function. It is like the force in the clock. You wind it up; so long as it is wound up it will work, but once that this force is exhausted—not the force that made it—but once the thing has been wound up and runs down, there is an end of it, it cannot function, and this force cannot function where there are no conditions.

Mr. Kingsland: It is more like a tree moving about in the wind. You see the effect of the wind by the tree, but if you take away the tree, the wind is blowing past there, just the same.

Blavatsky: The three higher principles are the human trinity, the three in one. They do not come to the child from the parents. If somebody objects to this and asks: how about the heredity intellect and its absence? You know, as they said the other time when somebody here thought the heredity the all. I say it is perfect nonsense. Neither this heredity intellect or dullness rests with the higher ego or Manas at all. Their degrees are dependent upon our physical organism and brain, the size of which, by the bye, does not always go pari passu with the quality of the brain. Now, some persons will say: “He has got an enormous brain, and it shows the intellect.” Not at all. I have been reading things in the medical books. The pig has a far larger brain than the man, and yet it is not quite so intellectual.

Mr. Old: They say the depth of convolutions, rather.

Blavatsky: No, they weigh the brain. Such a one has got so many ounces or pounds or tons. I say it is the quality, not the quantity. If the father or the mother were intellectual people, they will sometimes pass by inheritance an organism as theirs was to the child. Thence the son will have the same capacities of receiving into and reflecting in his physical brain the same amount of light from Manas or the mind principle. But how often do we find stupid sons of intellectual parents, and vice versa? This is not heredity. Do you understand this? The parents may give by heredity their organism, their convolutions, or whatever it is, the physical material, which will have the same capacity of reflecting the light from Manas as they had, therefore the child will be as intellectual; but Manas is not at all

562 
that. It is always the same, it is omniscient. It becomes dull or stupid only in its personalities and incarnations upon earth. You can’t say of Manas that one ego is more intellectual than the other.

Mr. Kingsland: Does not one ego bring back more Manases from the Devachanic state than another?

Blavatsky: Not at all. One ego will have a better Karmic development than another, but it does not bring back at all. Once it is past its period of illusion in Devachan—when it is in Devachan or anything, it becomes the omniscient ego.

Mr. Kingsland: But that portion which we have always understood to be assimilating, is not that brought back again?

Blavatsky: It is, but in Devachan it is not itself. It is very difficult to explain; it reflects the human personality, because if it did not do that, it could not have the bliss that it has, because Devachan, after all, is an illusion, the Fool’s Paradise.
