
Mr. Kingsland: But then that portion of Manas surely develops with every individual.

Blavatsky: It does, because the personality differs, but the Manas per se is the incarnating ego.

Mr. ——: Manifestation depends upon the perfection or the imperfection of the instrument.

A Lady: It would really be, then, from the parents you have a certain development or non-development of mechanism, and it is according to that the Manas is able to manifest itself in ordinary life, and that is where heredity will come in.

Blavatsky: The Manas is always the same. It is the stem, the eternal stem around which cling the personalities, so to say, those that come and go, and so on. It is called the Sutratma, the silver thread on which are strung those pearls as personalities—you know the expression—in its own inherent nature, or essence, it is

563
omniscient, for it is part of the Divine Mind. But once that it has been brought to incarnate on earth, it takes up all the materiality and all the finite attributes, so to say, and the qualities of the personalities it incarnates in, and moreover, these personalities are subject to the {im?}perfections of the material form.

A Lady: Supposing during the human life, the spiritual nature has been developed up to a very considerable extent, and then death comes. When that Manas returns to a fresh incarnation, will the progress that has been made in the past life settle the type of humanity that it will then take up, so that its past life will carry it on further?

Blavatsky: Certainly, if the Karma was good, it will go higher and higher, and all the experiences of the past life will come in this life, because, when you find children who are not at all like their parents—no musicians in the family—and you see little boy phenomenons, Hofmann,208 or some such things, this is a thing which comes from the previous life. It comes to him as easily as water to a duck.

Mr. ——: How does it happen that the mechanism he gets from his parents does not retard that? Because, if his parents are non- musical, then their mechanism, so far as regards music, must be stronger than his.

Blavatsky: It overpowers blind matter.

Mr. Kingsland: In many cases, I fancy it is retarded?

Blavatsky: Look at little, blind Tom, who is in America, a little nigger of four years, who is perfectly blind, and yet see the wonderful things that he does. 209

A Lady: Would it be attracted, rather, towards the musical

564 
mechanism?

Blavatsky: Heredity is a Karmic effect, therefore, if an individuality has to incarnate in Karma in a person, then the frame will be given to him, which will give to him this musical mechanism.

A Lady: There will be a sort of affinity?

Mr. Old: And then has not an astral body the power of impressing its own image upon the gross matter supplied by the physical parents?

Mr. Kingsland: The other way about.

Mr. Old: The antitype which exists previous to the child’s birth.

Blavatsky: This astral is nothing at all with the Manas that incarnates. This belongs to the lower matter, and this is given by the father and mother, by the parents, and around this astral then forms the physical child. But this astral is nothing to do with that. It is nothing to do with the ego, which is one and continuous, unbroken.

Mr. Old: The Monad, in incarnating, projects its shadow Chhaya.

Blavatsky: No, no, not at all.

Mr. Old: Does not it overshadow? It is said to overshadow the child.

Blavatsky: It overshadows the child that has its astral self in it, and its body. Then it begins overshadowing when the child is born, the Monad Buddhi, this immortal principle, gets into the child and overshadows it as soon as the child begins to be conscious—as conscious as a kitten, for instance, it is there already, but the Manas is called a different thing. The Manas is mind, that is why the child will never become intellectual before five or six years. It depends upon how precocious he is. Read in the second volume of The Secret Doctrine and see how the Lunar Pitris project their Chhayas, and having projected their Chhayas, this is the vehicle of the Monad.

Mr. Old: That is just what I understood, and it carries it towards the child—the as yet unintelligent child.

565
Blavatsky: I tell you again that till the Third Race, it does not link itself entirely.

Mr. Kingsland: It has nothing to do with the development of the germ, either physically or astrally, but it is attracted afterwards at a certain period to the already partly developed germ.

Mr. Old: How much of the individuality, then, shapes the organism?

Mr. Kingsland: That is the point I don’t think has been quite elucidated yet. Where does the individuality of the reincarnating Monad come in?

Blavatsky: The individuality is the reincarnating ego, the Manas. Manas is a thing, it is Sutratma. The personality and individuality are quite different. You make the same thing out of personality and individuality.

Mr. Kingsland: Where does the musical quality come in? How does that belong to it?

Blavatsky: It belongs to it because every personality that passes gives a certain colour, and gives more and more and more to the incarnating ego; and then it remains, this talent for music, and it brings it back. Very well; all that remains on the individuality, on the ego being reincarnated, is brought back on earth, and therefore it is an inherent soul quality.

Mr. Kingsland: I understood you just now, the intellectuality does not depend upon Manas at all, but upon physical qualifications.

Blavatsky: Intellectuality and music are quite different things. I have known idiots who played beautifully. I said the parents did not give to the child anything but the form, and certainly there is the lower Manas and the higher Manas. If they made the form fit enough to receive this higher light, or to have untrammeled this light from the Manas, he will be intellectual. If the Kama-rupa, or the lower Manas, predominates too much, then he won’t receive, because he will be dull. There will be no light coming from Manas.

566 
Manas, itself, depends upon Buddhi.

Mr. Kingsland: Then, as a matter of fact, there is a large portion of everyone’s Manas, that does not incarnate at all, that always remains undeveloped, unrepresented, in the present personality of the person.

Blavatsky: Remember that we are in the Fifth Race and only at the end of the Fifth Race will Manas be entirely developed, and we are yet on the Fourth Round only. I cannot tell you all that I would like to. There are three more rounds.

Mr. Kingsland: Take the case of the person who has got this inherent quality. Suppose he doesn’t find the physical conditions?

Blavatsky: Then he won’t be a musician. There is Karma that will always find that.

Mr. Kingsland: Surely the whole of your Karma does not find all the development. Where is it during the present incarnation?

Blavatsky: I can’t understand what you mean.

Mr. Old: I can understand your question, because it was one that arose in my mind.

Mr. Kingsland: Instead of saying music or intellectuality, let us say the character. Isn’t it the Manas or distinctive quality that gives character to the person?

Blavatsky: To give character to the person, do you mean that the Manas would have to change and become a different Manas every time? Where would be, if you please, the incarnating ego, the Sutratman?

Mr. Old: Then you think character is only an expression of mind?

Blavatsky: I only know one thing. Let us say this pair of spectacles is the Manas. It is always for ever eternally the same. Now, I put the spectacles in mud; something will remain on it of this mud. Then I will put them in jam, there will be some jam left. Then I will

567
put it in something else. Every incarnation gives to the Manas some personality, and at the end of the Manvantaric round, that is to say, at the end of the cycles of incarnation, there will be the Manas with all the experiences it has acquired. For personality dies. It is only the secret of spirituality, of the spiritual qualities, of the eternal qualities, that will survive. You read Esoteric Buddhism, and Esoteric Buddhism is well-enough written. You read it, Dr Berridge, I can’t explain it any better.

Mr. ——: Putting it into very bold English, supposing you always dropped them into jam?

Blavatsky: They will be very sweet then.

Mr. ——: Taking an analogy of jam and music—supposing it will be always music—Jozef Hofmann will have so much by and bye that it will be bound to come to the front.

Blavatsky: Certainly I like somebody who can speak plainly.

A Lady: He will also incarnate into a body in which the mechanism is likely to go towards music.

Blavatsky: I say that {in} the Karmic-sense heredity is governed by Karma, therefore, when the musical entity is to reincarnate, then certainly this law will take care that the body will be musical and fit for it—that they should not be born with stumps instead of fingers.

Mr. Old: You would say, really, that individual character is nothing else than expression of mind through different organisms, and that the organisms control the expression of character?

Blavatsky: For instance, you put some intelligence under blue glass, it will appear to you blue, or under red, and so on, it will go on like that.

Mr. Kingsland: If that is so, if Manas as we find it here depends upon the quality of the organism that it functions in, where does the development of Manas come in?

568 
Blavatsky: It develops through the personality. Manas does not come to be happy and to be developed, Manas comes because it is too pure and being too pure, it has neither merit nor demerit. Therefore, it must come and suffer a little bit, and have the experience of everything that can be got in this cycle of imagination {incarnation?}, and therefore, the same experiences will make it fit to emerge {merge?} in the Absolute. It contains all the experiences in this blessed world, and the worlds that have been and will be.

Mr. Kingsland: It appears from that, that Manas is something that is to be, still qualified by the individual lives with no life.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. In the Key to Theosophy I give all this. Read the Key to Theosophy. It will come out in two or three weeks. I think I answer every question there. It is extremely difficult for me, “unaccustomed as I am to public speaking,” to come and explain this. Really, I want to say one thing, and I say quite a different thing—or you take it as such.

Mr. Old: The next paragraph clears it up, I think. Question 3 (c). According to this view, the “spiritual plasm” referred to in the paragraph in question is not the Devachanic Entity, though it is liable to be confounded with it.210 There is, of course, a mystery within a mystery here, but it is very desirable that we should have a clear view of the matter, in connection with the more immediate derivation and evolution of the seven human principles.

Blavatsky: You see what I said. You are right, and Mr. Sinnett or somebody else spoke also of this heredity business as being an obstacle. Do you remember, Mr. Burrows, who spoke about it, that it was an obstacle?

Mr. Burrows: I don’t remember.

Blavatsky: It is just that which enters into Karmic attributes. Heredity is governed by Karma, in short. Therefore, you see, Karma will take care to bring it into a musical physical body.

569
Mr. Old: Then we may say that the law of heredity applies to the four lower principles, and the law of Karma operates in the plane of the three higher.

Blavatsky: The law of heredity has nothing to do with life. Remember what you learn, if you please, apart from the Thursdays. Exoterically it is, not esoterically.

Mr. Old: (d) From what is said on page 224, line 10 et seq, the above view would appear to be supported, with the further addition that the parent is also responsible for Manas—perhaps we should say, some portion of Manas?

Blavatsky: Now, how can the parent be responsible for Manas? You will say next it is responsible for Atma.

Mr. Old: It is the animal mind we refer to, perhaps?

Blavatsky: It is the reflection from the higher mind. We say it is dual simply because on this plane the full Manas cannot manifest; and in relation to its lower Manas, it is just the same as Parabrahm’s relation to the first Logos; it radiates. Very well, and the rest depends upon the more or less perfect organisms, on education, on environment, and on everything, on the vices that are inculcated; all these things that come, and are so many obstacles.

Mr. Kingsland: Then Manas stands there in the same way as Prana does in reference to the lower, to the life on the physical plane. It is universal, so to speak.

Blavatsky: The Manas is universal. These are distinct entities which incarnate, which in other Manvantaras have finished their cycle, and it is their time to incarnate in this cycle.

Mr. Kingsland: It says here the five lower principles in the four.

Blavatsky: It is not the five principles of the seven, it is the five principles of the lower principles. It is perfectly correctly said there. Man must have the fruition of all the five, it is said, and this

570 
fruition carries within it no responsibility to anyone. You look there on the page that you have been mentioning, page 224, line 20. You find there the phrase I have quoted: “Man must have the fruition of all the five”, and this fruition carries with it no responsibility to anyone. How can the parents be responsible for Manas, where Manas is a defined and independent entity? The parents may in some way be karmically responsible for the physical organism of the child, but certainly not for Manas.

Mr. Kingsland: Not responsible for Manas any more than they are responsible for Prana.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly.

Mr. Old: Question 4 (page 233). Since each round, globe, etc., is under the guidance of a “Creator,” “Builder,” or “Watcher,” can you tell us what part, if any, these Manus play in polity of nations on the terrestrial plane?

Blavatsky: None at all. The “Watchers” or “Builders” are commissioned by law to guide and animate, so to say, the elements of which our globe is composed; but they have no power to interfere with Karmic law, because they are not anthropomorphic gods. They are simply powers, cosmic powers, of which we have no ideas; not what you men of science and naturalists would call cosmic powers, but what we Occultists would call cosmic powers.

Mr. Old: Question 5. During the reign of one Manu or Race, have the other six any direct influence on human affairs?

Blavatsky: Well, I would say to you with the French. When the king dies they say: “The king is dead; long live the king!” How can the six Manus have anything to do with the Manus now? When an age or race has passed away, nothing that has caused the Nidanas, or the concatenation of causes of the previous, act on the new one. It is only the Karmic effects that develop. When Victoria dies, and you

571
have your next royal—ninny, shall I say—shall the four Georges211 have any direct influence on the forces of England? You see, I am a very great Republican.

Mr. Old: Question 6, page 238, Sloka 5: “Sacred Animals.” Elsewhere you explain the term “Sacred Animals” as referring symbolically to the signs of the zodiac. How is this meaning of the term connected with the explanation given here of it as “the first shadow of physical man”?

Blavatsky: How many times shall I have to repeat that each symbol has a septenary significance? Did I tell you one, or twenty, or a hundred times, that everything has seven meanings? In astronomy, the “Sacred Animals” mean the zodiacal signs; in geology, they mean the globes, which are also the planets (Which may be taken astronomically.), or geologically, as worlds; in zoology, they are sacrificial animals; in anthropology it is physical man. It has, in every department, some meaning, just as you apply it.

Mr. Old: Question 7, page 250: It would be interesting to have a clearer definition of the three “waters”—“solid water,” “liquid mist, watery,” “third world-element water”; also, to know the order of the development of the senses in the races of the Fourth Round. We are in the Fourth Round, but Fifth Race, and therefore are developing a sense which cannot reach its full expansions till the Fifth Round: 1.Fire (sight); 2. Air (touch); 3 Water (taste); 4. Earth (smell); 5. Ether (sound); 6. Akasa (intuition); 7. Kundalini sense (includes all others).

Blavatsky: We are, for the first time, in this Fourth Round; and we are, for the first time, men. In the three previous Rounds we were mere intangible phantoms; then ethereal, fluidic creatures; then jelly-like animals; and only in the Fourth Race we have become real physical men, haven’t we? Then, take the analogy, and look what I have written there, and go to bed. You must ask this question with

572 
your initiation of the masters, not of me (See footnote on page 252.) You put me questions that are—well, extraordinary. All this is esoteric, but I don’t mind telling you something of it. If you have air in seven states of density, why cannot you have water in such seven states of degree, and everything else, including fire? I ask you the question. Of course, if we represented and analyzed them, we shall find in each all the other elements, in one form or the other. Now, let us take earth, and we will find in it that we divide it into seven. We find in its lowest and most material end granite rock, the hardest that you can think of, which will become softer and softer as it passes through each of its states until it becomes mud, and what you would call simply dirty water. It will be matter, still. Now, in the rock, matter, or earth, you will find fire concealed, that is to say, it contains fire potentially, as it contains air and everything else. The same with air, which begins at the third stage above radiant matter, and ends with ether and Akasa, and so on. All this will show to you that, whether four or seven, these are called elements, are correlative, and each becomes a definite element only on our plane of perception and by one of its seven aspects, because that aspect which predominates over the others will give that qualifaction to that element. We call it water because that aspect is more developed than air, or fire; but, you will find all the seven in every element occultly, in reality, in their final essence, and on the plane of manifestation, they are all one element. And when they have achieved their cycle of evolution in the world of manifestation, this one disappears and they merge back into their primal cause, and from the one element they become no element again, absoluteness. I did not create the world. I cannot explain this to you; I must not.

Mr. Old: Question 8 (Page 260—end of second paragraph.) If our globe is in its Kama-rupic state, in what state was it during the First, Second, and Third Rounds?

Blavatsky: That is a modest man, and he asks very easy things, to which extremely easy answers can be given. Count from what you will, it is always the Kama-rupic state, since it is right in the middle.

573
From above or below it will become rupa. It is the middle thing; but, if we count from the races—for the evolution of the globes has to begin by the highest, or seventh—the second will correspond to the second, and so on. We call it Kama-rupic because there are no words to express the corresponding states. If from round we turn to races, it will be easier, and it is explained in The Secret Doctrine; everything is explained there, how with every race you acquire new facility. In the Fifth Race we have attained the highest intellectuality in this round; but in the Sixth Round or the Fifth Round, the Fifth Race will be a thousand times more intellectual yet. Take it all on analogy. Now, gentlemen, let us have questions, and I am ready to answer you.

Mr. Old: What is the meaning of the second plane mentioned here (page 262 note)?

Blavatsky: That is what I say. You ask me in three years that! Now, you had better ask questions, and we will make the conversation general.

(The proceedings then closed.)

