

Mr. Old: These are questions such as would come from a person beginning to search out Theosophical truth, and I thought myself that it would be a leader to the issue of this new book, The Key to Theosophy. I thought a consideration of some of the elementary questions would not only fill up a very pleasant evening, but, at the same time, would excite some interest in the book which is now approaching completion. They are mere elementary questions on Karma, Devachan, and Reincarnation; the How, When, and Where of Theosophy. Question 1. What is Karma?

Blavatsky: Am I really expected to answer this?

Mr. Old: You are.

Blavatsky: Karma is the law of retribution. Now, Mr. Bertram Keightley, go on.

Keightley: They would much rather listen to you than to me. However, Karma is, as HPB began to say, the law of retribution—that which is recognized by modern science as the law of cause and effect; but although that law is absolutely universal, the law of Karma is more frequently used in a narrower sense as applying more particularly to the law of cause and effect acting on the moral plane. Literally, it means simply action, and it expresses the idea that every action is productive of consequence, and so the chain

576 
of causation goes on infinitely; but, it is not simply that causes operate blindly, because in the Theosophical view the law of Karma is absolute intelligence; and it also has to be remembered that the law of Karma applies to the individual. It is not merely that a man performs certain actions.

Blavatsky: Stop. You say that the law of Karma is intelligent.

Keightley: I said “intelligence.”

Blavatsky: I say it is not. It is neither intelligence nor non- intelligence.

Keightley: It is absolute intelligence.

Blavatsky: Because you will make of it immediately a personal god, and I protest against that. That is to say, that everything that falls under the sway or the influence of that ever-present law will have certain effects, as in the physical world there is a concatenation of causes and effects always. For instance, if I do like that, I will just hurt my hand; the pain I feel in my hand will be the effect of having done that; so it is in the world of moral causes, but you cannot and must not say it is intelligent or intelligence. Is it simply the absolute harmony, absolute—well, call it intelligence, wisdom, anything you like. There again I am stuck for a word.

Keightley: It is true to say it acts with intelligence.

Blavatsky: It does not act. It is our actions that act, and that awaken into all kinds of influences. Look here, if you say that Karma acts and you say it has intelligence, immediately you suggest the idea of a personal god. It is not so, because Karma does not see and Karma does not watch, and does not repent as the Lord God repented. Karma is a universal law, immutable and changeless.

Keightley: But you cannot conceive of a law which does not act.

Blavatsky: Well, I say it does not act; in my conception, it

577 
does not act. Well, Karma does not act any more than water drowns you.

Keightley: But water does drown you.

Blavatsky: Water does not drown you. You drown yourselves in the water. Don’t go into the water and you won’t get drowned.

Mr. Old: Is it possible to get outside the law of Karma, then?

Blavatsky: You cannot.

Mr. Old: The analogies scarcely fit.

Blavatsky: I beg your pardon. It does, as much as it can fit in this world of physical symbols, or whatever you may call them, because it is the way that you act. It is not because you act wickedly or sinfully, or with or without a motive, you produce an effect. You strike a note in the universal.

Mr. Ralph Sneyd: Is not ignorance the cause of all evil action?

Blavatsky: It is, but Karma does not take stock of it, does not concern itself whether you do it from ignorance or from too much learning. It is simply if you do a certain thing, so the effect will be on a similar line. For instance, you will strike one note, and you know perfectly well what will be the consequence of that note. That is why I simply wanted to stop Mr. Keightley, because he said it was intelligent and it acted. Certainly we must say that it acts; but, I want you at the same time to understand that in saying it acts, we use the same expression as if we said the sun is setting. The sun does not set at all.

Mr. Burrows: If our action is a note which we strike, that really is the echo of some previous note which has been struck somewhere in the universe.

Blavatsky: Certainly, it is not the first time that you struck this note. Whether you strike it in the ordinary way, or otherwise, it depends on that whether it will be flat, sharp or something else.

578 
Mr. Kingsland: Karma is, so to speak, the absolute equilibrium; and however we act we disturb that equilibrium one way or another, and Karma adjusts.

Keightley: The analogy that dwells in my mind is this—it almost presents itself to me under this form: If we conceive ourselves as beings absolutely surrounded and penetrating everything in fluid of such a nature that every action we make in that fluid produces a series of vibrations which eventually react upon ourselves; if you imagine a body suspended in a perfect fluid, no movement is possible without disturbing the fluid. That sort of pressure pressing in upon you from all sides, that substance—if you like to call it that—is Karma, or rather, Karma describes the relation of that subject.

Blavatsky: There is simply one way of getting outside the influence of Karma; it is the yogis who do it only; it is by merging oneself more and more in the Laya state. That is to say, that you are just like in a vessel out of which air has been pumped—a perfect vacuum. In that vacuum, of course, you cannot go either left or right or any way; there is no point of attraction, and there you are. You understand the analogy?

Mrs. Besant: Then it would always be the striving after equilibrium?

Blavatsky: Certainly! Every action produces a Karmic effect on the spiritual plane, on the psychic, on the spiritual, and everything, and the only thing is to be in this neutral point where there is no differentiation, where there is no action.

Mr. Old: Then we understand Karma to be the law of equilibrium.

Blavatsky: It is perfect harmony and equilibrium.

Keightley: I think you want to add to it one thing. People get an idea very often that Karma only applies to bad actions. Karma is simply the action, the law of the consequence of action of all kinds, whether good or bad, and it is, entirely apart from that, the inevitable sequence of cause and effect. It will fall upon you whether the action is good or bad.

579 
Mr. Sneyd: But would not you say that all that arose—every evil consequence which decreased happiness—arose from ignorance on the part of the conscious being that did the action? However learned a person may be, supposing he does an action which results in the decrease of his happiness, should not you say that action was caused by his ignorance in some respect?

Blavatsky: But ignorance won’t save you from the effects of Karma.

Mr. Sneyd: Don’t you think ignorance is the cause of bad Karma?

Blavatsky: It is.

Mr. Sneyd: And that knowledge is the cause of all good Karma? Supposing you did a thing and it increased your happiness; would not it be the reason of that would most likely be that you had done something with knowledge, as it were?

Keightley: I don’t think so, because the effects produced by a given cause are not always of the same character. You see, a man who uses his knowledge to do good, to make good Karma for himself, acts fundamentally from a selfish motive, which is again a wrong motive, at the back of his good action.

Mr. Sneyd: Would not the reason be that he was ignorant in so far as he did not know the interest of one conscious being was the interest of all?

Blavatsky: Wait a moment, there is another question about Karma here.

Mr. Old: I thought it would not do to let each question go too far into the discussion, otherwise it might overlap some of the other questions. The second question is: How far does this law operate in this life, and how far in Devachan?

Blavatsky: In Devachan, it does not operate at all. It is the law of Karma which sends a man to Devachan with a programme

580 
already prepared beforehand, which program is the consequence of his suffering and of the miseries that he had in this world, and it is already there; it is cut and dried for him. Karma waits on the threshold of Devachan at the moment of reincarnation, and then it pounces upon the individual when he is rewarded. There is no punishment in the hereafter, in the other world, as you call it.

Mrs. Besant: It only works then, really, in this world?

Blavatsky: It is the hell, and the purgatory, and everything, and the paradise.

Keightley: The good effects are reaped in Devachan.

Blavatsky: Reaped for those who want a consolation, and want a rest, and bliss, and care for it; those who don’t care for it won’t have it.

Mr. Gardner: The fool’s paradise.

Blavatsky: For instance, you are perfectly indifferent to everything.

Mr. Kingsland: There is a question which might be put with reference to very wicked people who don’t go into Devachan.

Blavatsky: They are born almost immediately after a kind of sleep in which they won’t have very nice dreams.

Mr. Kingsland: That is what I wanted to say.

Blavatsky: There is nothing, you see, like Devachan; there is Avichi, but that is quite a different thing.

Mr. Kingsland: In the state of Kamaloka.

Blavatsky: There it is no more the man, the entire man. He has been left and abandoned by one of his principles, he has no more of the Atma over him; he has simply his intelligence and his consciousness. That is why I say those creatures that you see in the séance rooms are so very dangerous. It is not the man, it is the

581 
shadow of the man, and his reflection; but with all the wickedness and with all the wicked influences, the utmost fear of all that which he has committed in this life. And certainly he will inoculate it in those present as though a living man came with the smallpox and gave it to you all. All this idea of spiritualism is perfectly ridiculous.

Mr. Old: Then Karma does not operate, or has no active operation, only a reflex operation, in Devachan?

Blavatsky: Merely sends a man into Devachan and stops on the threshold. Allegorically speaking, it waits when the man comes out of the state of bliss, during which he will be rewarded for all the unmerited suffering and all the things he had—for after all, a man is a very miserable creature. A man does not want to be born, and does not know he is born.

Mr. Burrows: Is there such a thing as unmerited suffering?

Blavatsky: If you suffer from causes you produce, it is merited; but very often you have sufferings through causes generated by other persons, of which you are not guilty at all.

Mrs. Besant: For instance, national Karma.

Blavatsky: Very often you suffer for things you have never committed, but you simply happen to fall under this current, and there you are. You suffer tremendously, and you suffer that which is not merited, and then you have to have an adequate bliss and reward for it.

Keightley: That is the personal Karma. The suffering man has a conscious personality—Mr. Smith or Mr. Brown, who is not aware he has committed any of these crimes, how shall we say? Take for instance now, this accident in America; 212 it will be a very good instance. Now, you could not suppose that all the people that have been drowned or have suffered in various ways, and all the children

582 
in that catastrophe, were all, as it were, brought under its influence by their personal Karma, so to speak, would you, HPB?

Blavatsky: No. It is just that, you know.

Keightley: There a dam bursts and these people are swept away.

Mr. Sneyd: Would not you say it was the result of a sort of ignorance on the part of those people being there and not knowing the train would come to a smash?

Keightley: Of course it is, in one sense.
