
Mr. Old: This is what you call diffused Karma. A person comes under it by virtue of being an atom of a body. He cannot have a law separate from the body to which he belongs.

Keightley: The distinction I drew between the personality and individuality of a man is of special importance, because as a personality he has not perhaps a responsibility for that; he is one of a race, and he suffers the Karma of the race.

Mr. Burrows: And then the justice comes in afterwards.

Keightley: Because he has suffered personally more than he has merited, he receives his reward in Devachan in the shape of a personal reward. Is not that so, HPB?

Mr. Old: Then our third question is: How far can this law of Karma be diverted, deferred, or prevented—diverted in the sense of turning off one track, onto another?

Blavatsky: You meddle with Karma, and then it will be just a thousand times worse. You can defer it and you can stop it for a while, but it will come always.

Mr. Old: You cannot prevent it, then?

Blavatsky: You cannot; it will become worse.

583 
Keightley: Can you divert it in the sense of changing the character of its manifestation? Can you neutralize bad Karma by subsequent good action?

Mr. Old: Can an individual take on the Karma of half a dozen people?

Blavatsky: He cannot. No! Sir.

Mr. Kingsland: But you can make new Karma for half a dozen people.

Blavatsky: Yes, but you cannot take it any more than you can take the illness of a half a dozen persons. Now, if it is not Karmic, of course you may stop it—this thing which has been produced by someone else—but if it is Karmic, nothing will stop it.

Mr. Old: A person who alleviates suffering only generates good Karma for himself.

Blavatsky: He does temporary good to the persons, but the Karma must come in some other shape.

Mr. Old: Because I was wondering how far Karma was worked out, or worked off, in physical suffering.

Blavatsky: Who told you that? I don’t know what you mean.

Mr. Old: Well, you know, some people suffer tremendously in this world, they undergo physical suffering. Well, I presume that is one of the effects comprehended under the law of Karma.

Blavatsky: Or perhaps the Karma of your parents.

Mr. Old: Well, that is a diversion of Karma.

Blavatsky: But you can’t take it voluntarily. Your parents have been creating a bad Karma for you in the shape of heredity, disease, and therefore for this you are going to be rewarded in Devachan, and consoled for it, and your parents when they are incarnated will have to pay for it. For instance, there is one kind of Karma that nobody

584 
thinks of: it is for statesmen and kings and all the blessed autocrats. If they wanted to do any good, they ought to do the following: to have the strictest laws not to permit diseased persons, consumptive people, those with anything like insanity or scrofula 213 in them, to get married and to have children, because this is the greatest crime that can be. They have no right to do it, and this is the thing that brings the worst Karma, and changes whole populations. I know I was forty years ago in England, and I saw of every ten men, there were seven or eight who were magnificently and stoutly built. I come here now, if you please, and I see the population altered. Look at the army. You have no more of those men you had forty years ago, there are none, it is changing entirely. You see sometimes tall men, and that is all; but certainly it is not what it used to be.

Keightley: How far is it that the Karma of the reincarnating egos in those diseased and unhealthy bodies—how far does their Karma attract?

Blavatsky: I suppose it does attract them, but sometimes it does not. It is very difficult to come and tell you of these workings of Karma.

Keightley: It is one of the very great points.

Mr. Old: I want to know if it is any good alleviating suffering.

Blavatsky: It is good if you distribute suffering, so that you will have a little today and a little tomorrow. When you suffer terribly, you lose your head; but on the other hand, you get accustomed to suffering. Now, I don’t remark my pains and aches, but if I had them all at once, I don’t know what I would be.

Mr. Kingsland: Is there not all along the tendency to refer Karma too much to the physical plane? All we are making that mistake, I think.

Blavatsky: Surely.

585 
Mr. Kingsland: People are apt to imagine that you do an act, and that that act produces a certain effect in the next incarnation. Well that act, as an act on the physical plane, can only produce a physical result on the physical plane. What is carried over in the next incarnation, which becomes your Karma, is the effect which is produced in you. The state of consciousness, so to speak, in doing that act; it is not the act itself. The mere act of killing a man is a physical act on the physical plane, and won’t result in Karma on the physical plane.

Blavatsky: But see the moral effect it produces—and that goes for a thousand times more than the physical act. The man that dies today, dies instead of dying two or three days later, but he may leave orphans. By the act of killing, the generations will be thrown entirely in a new track. They will be scattered, every one of them will go into other creations they never thought about; others will go into other parts. Physically it is nothing; only, the physical produces moral effects and results.

Mr. Sneyd: Supposing we say there is a man that is blind, and he runs in the way of a railway train, that train runs over him. Is not that the result of a sort of ignorance, or absence of knowledge and perceptions?

Blavatsky: Again this may be merited or unmerited, as the case may be.

Mr. Sneyd: Supposing we say that the driver stopped the train in time?

Keightley: The driver saw him and stopped the train?

Mr. Sneyd: How would it be then?

Keightley: It was the man’s Karma to be saved.

Mr. Sneyd: You could not say that he was ignorant, then, to a certain extent?

586 
Keightley: Oh yes. He was not saved by his own act, but by the act of somebody else.

Mr. Old: Question 4. How far does the general belief in Karma operate towards the acceptance of fatalism?

Blavatsky: If you are ignorant, you see fatalism.

Mrs. Besant: But the way it comes from outsiders sometimes is, that supposing you believe in these evils, why should you go against them?

Blavatsky: That is what the Easterners do. We don’t do it, but the Eastern people do it.

Keightley: Is it right to do that?

Blavatsky: Not always. When it is done as the Muslim does it, it is bad, because it is crass fatalism.

Keightley: Take the people in Burma. They practically, until they were brought under the influence of Olcott and yourself, sat down under the state of things.

Blavatsky: They accepted it not on account of Karma, but on account of [  ].

Keightley: Well that is Karma in another form. It is really an important question, what is the right spirit to develop, to cultivate in yourself in reference to the action of Karma.

Blavatsky: To do your duty on this plane. Not to go and kick against Karma, any more than what a Christian will tell you—don’t fly into the face of Providence, to a certain extent. But it {is} your duty when you see any evil to try and avoid it, not only for yourself—which would be very little—but for anyone else.

Mrs. Besant: And try to help other people out of it.

Blavatsky: Yes, more than you help yourself.

587 
Mr. Burrows: Is not the true solution that we should separate “it” from humanity?

Keightley: Here you get this: Before the last 25 years, the population in India, broadly speaking, sat down and submitted to European rule and domination—I am speaking very broadly—but now what they do is to try and wake themselves up from their sloth and apathy, and to reorganize and to start a fresh current of activity in which the Theosophical Society has had a very large share. They are reacting, and are doing their best to react against the condition into which their past history in Karma had brought them. Is that right or is that wrong?

Blavatsky: It is right, because a life of inaction is worse than a life of action.

Keightley: If a man feels the impulse in himself, it is a part of the law working through him.

Mr. Old: It is like Bailey’s definition, “Freewill in man is necessity in play.” 214

Blavatsky: Individually, there is free will, but once you take it collectively, there is no free will. It operates only with personalities. But speak of a nation or think of a nation, what kind of a free will has it? It is simply a dry leaf that is blown hither and thither, and sent by the wind everywhere. You have no right to sit and do nothing. You are obliged to be coworkers with Nature. But otherwise, as is said in the Apocalypse, “Nature will spew you out of the mouth.”215

Keightley: The law of progress is as much a part of the law of Karma. The thing to get out of the idea of Karma is not the idea that you have to sit down and accept things as they are—though you should not resent things—but you should strive your level {best} to

588 
make those things right, without the feeling of bitter resentment.

Mr. Burrows: If we try to alter them now, it will be better in the future. It is not selfishness.

Keightley: Then that again is productive of evil.

Mrs. Besant: So that really you strive against the evil.

Keightley: Yes. Without resentment.

Mr. Burrows: That is a very important point, because the tendency now is get angry and bitter.

Mr. Sneyd: How do you say about free will? How can one prove there is such a thing, when everything is the result of cause and effect? I don’t say that exactly. Well, I can see one thing, I suppose you the cause—the individual himself is the cause.

Keightley: Yes, the primary cause. The conditions under which he operates the Karma, so to speak, that is working out. As an individual, he is a cause.

Mr. Burrows: But would it be right to say that we can really create fresh causes?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. Every one of you creates fresh causes from morning to night. That is where the free will comes in, because if there were no free will you would not create causes, you would simply be under the thrashing of this law.

Keightley: Under the blows of the law.

Mr. Gardner: The results of past Karma. If the actions are happening by accident, they are the result of past Karma.

Blavatsky: The accidents are commas and semicolons, that is all they are.

Keightley: Yes, the accidents are the punctuation of life.
