
589 
Mr. Old: Things from which we measure off theories.

Blavatsky: Accidents are not things that are preordained, if you please.

Mr. Old: Then we branch off on to the subject of death.

Blavatsky: That is why we say we are our own punishers and rewarders and saviors.

Mr. Old: Then come questions on Devachan. It opens up with the orthodox question: What is Devachan—a state, a place, or both?

Blavatsky: A state. It is no more a place than your dreams.

Mr. Old: Has it any corresponding loka?

Blavatsky: No, it has not. We may be in Devachan, I can be in this chair, and you can be on yours. It is a state, not a locality.

Keightley: That is one of the things that strengthens its analogy to sleep.

Blavatsky: It is a dream—the most vivid, so vivid that even in this life there are dreams that sometimes you awaken and are not sure whether it was reality or not. You just imagine yourself a dream as vivid as life.

Mr. Kingsland: Now we think of an entity in Kamaloka, which is attracted at certain times to a séance room.

Blavatsky: They are not entities, they are reflections, they are spooks.

Mr. Kingsland: For the time being, they are to a certain extent individualized. We have been accustomed to talk of the Devachanic entity.

Blavatsky: Yes, because it is the three higher principles; but would you think of an entity of a personality? You would not call the reflection of a personality in the looking glass an entity.

590 
Mrs. Besant: But the one in Devachan is the three higher principles.

Blavatsky: It is consciousness.

Keightley: The three higher principles, at any rate, have some sort of Upadhi, or basis. Where is the Upadhi of the three higher principles during the Devachanic period?

Blavatsky: Upadhi is the consciousness of it and nothing else. It is the Manas.

Mr. Old: Is there no form under which this Monad is identified?

Blavatsky: No form at all. It has a form in your own consciousness, and everything else that it sees are forms, created by the consciousness.

Keightley: Can you say that your thought is anywhere? That is the analogy.

Mr. Old: No, but you can embody it.

Blavatsky: No, you cannot.

Keightley: If the thought or Manas is the Upadhi of the Devachanic entity, then you can’t say your thought is located anywhere.

Blavatsky: “Remembrance” will not express the thing. It is the recollection of your personality, the feeling of the ego, that you were the personal ego; and that is the Upadhi of Devachan. Because if you are Mr. Smith, Mr. Smith will be in Devachan as Mr. Smith and will have the little Smiths around him, if he loved them, and his Mrs. Smith and everything. Therefore the Upadhi is the consciousness of this personality for the time being. After it leaves Devachan, it is no more Mr. Brown.

Mrs. Besant: But would Mr. Smith be visible to a higher intelligence?

Blavatsky: Why should a higher intelligence look at him, what is there to see in the consciousness of another personality? The

591 
higher intelligence has got something better to do. What do you mean, Mrs. Besant, by higher intelligence—a Deva, a god?

Mrs. Besant: Yes, in all those higher instances.

Blavatsky: We are not concerned with them. During the Devachanic period the personality becomes, for the time being, so to say, merged in the individuality. It is immortal, for the time of the cycle of life and, so to say, the individuality plays the part of that personality that he or she was during the life period, and this is the Upadhi, this is the basis upon which the whole Devachanic experiences and thoughts of bliss go and act.

Mrs. Besant: Suppose we take it as a state of sleep. A bystander would see the person, but not the mind. Then if that body is gone, there is nothing left to see.

Blavatsky: Certainly that is what it is. It is consciousness, just that.

Keightley: I suppose you could only say it was the centre of consciousness in the Akasa?

Blavatsky: Now what has Akasa to do with it? Neither Akasa, nor ether, nor air has anything to do with it. It is simply a state of consciousness. It is a state, and not a locality.

Mr. Kingsland: But it is an individualized state of consciousness.

Blavatsky: Yes, for a person that is in a Devachanic condition. My Devachan won’t be yours, and yours won’t be mine. It is that a person dies and suddenly finds itself in Devachan, where the separation of the principles takes in a moment—or several days or weeks or months. All this depends upon the previous life of the personality, on the statement, on the degree of intellectuality, on the degree of everything.

Mr. Burrows: Then if Mr. Smith has Mrs. Smith there, it does not follow of necessity that Mrs. Smith has got Mr. Smith?

592 
Blavatsky: Yes. If Mr. Smith loved her he would have Mrs. Smith, but if he did not, he won’t even remember her.

Mr. Burrows: But suppose Mrs. Smith did not love him.

Blavatsky: That is another thing.

Mr. Burrows: He will have her, and she won’t have him.

Blavatsky: It is that which we loved. In Devachan there is a perfect oblivion of everything that was disagreeable or that caused any pain, or of anything but an eternal bliss—which must be, by the way, exceedingly monotonous and stupid.

Mrs. Besant: It is really, then, the fruition of our desires.

Blavatsky: All the aspirations you had which were unsatisfied, all that which you could not have here through divers circumstances, you will have in Devachan. You will have all your desires realized, everything that you loved and could not have—perhaps that from which you are separated—but spiritually; nothing that pretends to the earth. For instance, if you had some vicious love or something like that, you will have nothing of the kind there.

Mr. Burrows: Supposing three or four people had the same desire.

Blavatsky: Every one of them will have it, so long as it is not vicious. Now, for instance, a man who drank himself to death will certainly not have his whiskey there.

Mrs. Besant: It is only Buddhi-Manas that goes.

Blavatsky: Atma is nothing; it is all absolute, and it cannot be said that it is this, that, or the other. It is simply that in which we are—not only that we live and breathe and have our being, but in the whole universe, and during the whole Manvantaric period. Therefore, Atma is said to have Buddhi for a vehicle, because Buddhi is already the first differentiation after the evolution of the universe; it is the first differentiation, and it is the Upadhi, so to say, of Atma. Then Buddhi is nothing, per se, but simply the first differentiation,

593 
and it is the consciousness in the universal consciousness, but it is non-consciousness in this world. On this plane of finite consciousness it is nothing, for it is infinite consciousness. Understand me, Atman cannot be called infinite consciousness. It is the one Absolute, which is conscious non-consciousness; it contains everything, the potentiality of all; therefore, it is nothing and all. It is Ain Soph, and it is the Parabrahm and so on; many names you can give it. It is “No Thing,” you understand? Therefore, Buddhi being the first differentiation, the first ray, it is universal consciousness, and could not act on any one plane, especially on the terrestrial plane; and to be conscious of something, of somebody, it must have Manas, that is to say, the consciousness of this plane. If you read The Secret Doctrine you will see that men had nothing of the kind until the Manasaputra (The sons of the mind.) incarnated in the forms that were projected by the Lunar Pitris. There was nothing but matter, and the nothingness of Buddhi and Atma; therefore, they had to be cemented, so to say, between this Buddhi and themselves. They had to have this Manas, which is the finite consciousness of our plane of existence and their incarnating ego. This incarnating ego, which goes from one personality to another, collects the experiences of every life. After having collected all the experience of millions and millions of incarnations, then, when the Manvantaric period ceases, and this world goes into dissolution, this ego, having had all this experience, approaches more and more of the Absolute, and, at the end of I do not know how many Manvantaras, certainly it will become—before it merges into the one, it must have the experience. Then it approaches more and more and more that which is all and nothing. Finally it emerges. When we say that we speak about the state of Nirvana, that is nothing. It is Para-Nirvana that we are speaking about. Nirvana is simply a high Devachan.

Mr. Burrows: When does the memory come in of all the previous incarnations?

Blavatsky: To have a memory you have to live. You can have the memory of what? If you have never been anything, you cannot

594 
have a memory. You must have a memory of something.

Mr. Kingsland: Mr. Burrows asked at what point it came on.

Blavatsky: Every life is a peg on which you hang that memory.

Mr. Burrows: When does the universal memory come in?

Blavatsky: That is a thing which is during the whole Manvantara; it is the Mahat, as they call it. It is the universal intelligence, and all these incarnating egos are simply rays of that.

Mr. Keightley: When the ray has succeeded in merging itself into the universal mind, it then recovers the knowledge.

Blavatsky: When there is an end of all, there is the Maha- Pralaya—not what will come after our little earth is destroyed. Then Mahat itself disappears and is merged in Parabrahm, and is merged in the All.

Mr. Burrows: Then does reincarnation go on again in the higher plane?

Blavatsky: Yes. You see, the butterfly will never become the chrysalis and the grub again. It goes on, and nature never goes back, but always goes progressing higher and higher. It may become, for instance, mentally, and in its acts, a thousand times worse than it was before, but it will be higher on the plane of physical manifestation—physically.

Mr. Old: What gave me the opinion that the Devachan had some particular form and a place corresponding to its state was this. I think on page 235 {157}, Volume 1, where those tables are given and the scheme of the different schools of thought in the East, it says: Upadhi is a basis and in a corresponding system of philosophy it is translated by the word {kosha}, which means a sheath. That word is very confounding, especially when we see that opposite Manas. Thus: one of the Devachanic principles is put [  ], or [  ], the causal basis or sheath. You see, that is what gives one an incorrect opinion.

595 
Keightley: Are not you confusing the idea of basis with the idea of form? They are not the same. For instance, the water you may consider the basis of something, but you could not say it has a form, per se.

Blavatsky: You consider gas the basis of something.

Keightley: Upadhi and form are not the same things.

Mr. Old: Has this monad a diffused consciousness into the whole universal Devachan? Has it a locus? Has it a distinct place? Has it a limitation?

Blavatsky: It has not. Consciousness has no limitation.

Keightley: How can it have, when three belong to the Arupa world?

Blavatsky: Of which two are nothing.

Keightley: I was quoting The Secret Doctrine.

Blavatsky: You take the three systems of philosophy {in The Secret Doctrine, I:157}, one of which shows what the Theosophists give, one what the [  ] {Taraka Raja Yoga} give, and the other what the Vedantins give; it is not at all that it corresponds. It corresponds to one as a sheath, and the other does not. It is only our [  ], or the occult system, because that is a thing which is confined to the three principles, and we are dividing it into seven principles, because it is a great deal easier to explain. The Vedantins have got five sheaths and the sixth, the Atma and the Buddhi, of which they don’t speak at {all}, because what they mean by [  ] does not mean at all the Buddhi, but simply the astral form.

Mr. Old: The next question is: What determines the length of the Devachanic state?

Blavatsky: Your actions.
