
Mr. Old: In the previous life?

596 
Blavatsky: In the previous life.

Mr. Old: It is not, then, the aggregate?

Blavatsky: It is not the aggregate, unless there is some surplus that has to be worked out.

Mr. Old: Then you consider that at the end of Devachan, we are quits?

Blavatsky: We are quits with that personality of Mr. Smith and Mr. Brown, and there is the end of it.

Mr. Gardner: Still, it is possible to spread it over a series of Devachans. For instance, Napoleon Bonaparte’s Devachan—that would be spread over several.

Blavatsky: Yes. I think he will have a nice Karma for the people he has killed.

Mr. Old: It is such an accumulation of energy. It is quite an event to have a man like Bonaparte in the world, and in order to have reaction in the next life, it would be quite a different thing.

Blavatsky: I don’t suppose he has much to do in Devachan. He was the most materialistic man that ever was. He had no Devachan. If he had a Devachan after his own mind he would have all you English and try that you should have one head, and cut it off.

Mr. Gardner: I suppose he was the embodiment of the nation?

Blavatsky: No.

Mr. Old: What seems to determine the length in my mind is the activity of the nature, the rate at which the monad runs.

Blavatsky: The intensity of your aspirations or desires, and the degree of your sufferings unmerited—those that you have not deserved directly, but through the Karma or the bad actions of somebody else—that is what determines it.

597 
Mrs. Besant: The more desires you have, the longer you will be there?

Blavatsky: Yes. But if you have desires that were perfectly on the spiritual plane, then you are sure to be a spook.

Mr. Sneyd: When the individuality becomes merged in Parabrahm, then in that state, why do they call it the nothing, if it is the reality?

Mr. Old: It is not called nothing; it is no thing.

Blavatsky: It is the All.

Mr. Sneyd: But they only mean when they say nothing, no thing.

Mr. Old: Nothing is the wrong pronunciation; it is no thing.

Mr. Sneyd: It seems a contradiction.

Blavatsky: Ain Soph—No thing.

Mr. Sneyd: It is, really, I suppose, the state of intense happiness?

Blavatsky: That cannot be, unless you feel intense unhappiness—a contrast. Parabrahm is not to be either happy or unhappy, and does not feel, because feeling is a finite thing.

Mr. Sneyd: Then why should we wish for it?

Blavatsky: I suppose on account of our stupidity, which is great.

Keightley: Or because we have learned that you cannot have happiness apart from suffering. Why do you go in for differentiated existence? Why do you desire pleasure, or happiness? You desire by that very fact the corresponding pain or suffering, the two being differentiated aspects.

Mr. Old: Everything exists by relation of its own opposites.

Mr. Sneyd: For instance, I can go to a beautiful picture gallery.

598 
Blavatsky: You won’t have them in Devachan.

Mr. Kingsland: The more your mind is attuned to happiness, the more it is subject to the shock of discord; and the more intense your pains are in one direction, the more pleasure in another.

Mr. Sneyd: Why should we say that is Parabrahm?

Keightley: May I put this question to you? Can you imagine this condition as lasting permanently? Can you really suppose every desire that you conceive of, gratified? You will find it uncommonly slow when you try it on for about five minutes, because the very fact of having a desire produces suffering until it is fulfilled.

Blavatsky: To have a desire is already suffering, because it is something ungratified. The fact of desiring is suffering.

Mr. Sneyd: But you know you would have it soon, that there is something new coming, something coming on extra, as it were. You are satisfied with what you have got, but you are very glad of this extra.

Mr. Kingsland: You can go piling the extras up until there was nothing left of extras.

Mr. Old: Parabrahm is a state of absolute indifference.

Blavatsky: Please don’t call Parabrahm happiness, because it is lowering to the idea of the happy god who sits and rejoices and something smells sweet to his nostrils.

Keightley: If you think about it you will see you cannot have one without the other, really and truly.

Mr. Sneyd: But why should we wish for it? Supposing we say it is absolute indifference. Why should we wish for it?

Mr. Kingsland: You think that over, and in the meanwhile we will go on.

Mr. Old: What is the impulse which determines the Devachanee

599 
to incarnate?

Blavatsky: It is Karma that makes him incarnate. He won’t have more than he deserves; there is no impulse in him, but he dies out, his dream is at an end.

Mr. Old: When a man takes a meal, he satisfies his hunger. When the Devachanee has assimilated the experiences of his past existence, then there is reaction which takes place.

Keightley: I think that gives the impression on the mind that the Devachanee is actually desiring reincarnation, which is not the case.

Mr. Kingsland: He has no choice.

Keightley: If he did, you do away with one of the first great causes.

Mr. Old: But you must get rid of the sense of individual desire, because the monads have no such desire. Then how would you define that impulse?

Blavatsky: There is no impulse on the part of the Devachanee; it is no impulse at all. Karma takes him by the nape of his neck, and there is no impulse at all, just as when a policeman comes and takes yours.

Keightley: In which case, there is a strong impulse to take to your heels and run away.

Mr. Burrows: Does he know that he is going to be reincarnated at all?

Blavatsky: Well, it is a poetical expression.

Mr. Sneyd: I think you said it had no effect, in Devachan?

Blavatsky: There is no new effect produced. It has placed the Devachanee into the state of happiness; it gives him his fill of what he deserves and stands and whistles at the door. When that is

600 
finished, Karma takes him by the nape of the neck and puts him into the new body.

Keightley: Then you come to the question which Mr. Burrows raised—when the Devachanee knows he is reincarnated.

Blavatsky: You will see it in the Key to Theosophy. There are two moments when the reincarnating ego returns to its pristine omniscience, because, since it is Manasaputra (Meaning the son of wisdom or the universal intelligence.), it is omniscient—or it is at the moment of death, just at the moment when a man dies. When he is dead, he is dead, and it is finished, and he sees everything.

Keightley: He sees the life he is going to enter into.

Blavatsky: He is really himself and knows everything.

Mr. Gardner: Does he see his past lives?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly he does; it is what the Buddha saw.

Keightley: He does not forget, but the impression is not transferred.

Blavatsky: It cannot be transferred, because the instrument cannot receive it. Sometimes you have it, in moments of high vision. What is it, for instance, the states the sensitive persons have? It is simply by some circumstance, some physiological cause or reason or nervous condition. The faculties that were impeding the man to receive this light from his Manas, from his higher ego, are suddenly taken away.

Keightley: Occasionally the light is reflected upon our physical brain.

Blavatsky: It is like a cobweb. For a moment he says: that is what it is, because the ego is omniscience per se, not omniscience in the body. It is an extremely interesting thing, if only one could put it into language. If I had your gift of speech, I can assure you I would make all London Theosophists. It is one thing to be plain, because

601 
I sit and explain, and another to say in one sweeping, magnificent phrase the whole thing. I have not got “the gift of the gab.”

Mr. Old: Is it possible to escape Devachan, say from pure aversion to its useless inactivity?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. Don’t desire anything and you won’t have Devachan. You will have nothing to hang your consciousness on. You will be asleep and snore and have no dreams.

Mr. Old: That is worse than ever. Let us dream out of preference.

Blavatsky: But there are persons who reach to such wisdom that once they are dead they are perfectly done with. I have taken off my dress and here I am. What am I going to do? Shall I go to sleep, and so on. And the person shall do as he likes.

Mr. Old: Could you predetermine those which should be your experience?

A Lady: Then you want another body.

Blavatsky: You live in your five principles.

Mrs. Besant: You keep on getting in your five principles.
