
Blavatsky: That is just what the adepts do; they have a perfect right to Nirvana, but they won’t go; they think it is selfish to do so, and they won’t go. They refuse the Nirvanic condition. That is just like Gautama did. He wants to be present, but he has no right to interfere with Karma.

Mr. Burrows: That would be the highest form of unselfishness.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, because it is suffering. Every Nirmanakaya suffers, because it is terrible to be there, and see the misery and sufferings of people, and not to be able to help them.

Mrs. Besant: Still, you are a force for good.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. This is the most glorious thing,

602 
and that is what they say that Buddha did and many of the adepts.

Mr. Old: It is called the great renunciation.

Blavatsky: Yes. Remember what I speak about with reference to the Silent Watcher. This has got a very profound occult meaning.

Mrs. Besant: That is the great sacrifice.

Mr. Sneyd: Is not Gautama now in Nirvana?

Blavatsky: The orthodox Buddhist will tell you he is, but he is not.

Keightley: Besides the Nirmanakayas, others escape. There are numerous cases of speedy reincarnation without Devachan.

Blavatsky: For instance, children who died before the age of reason. Immediately they are reincarnated. Persons who did not have a glimpse of spirituality in them. It is a degree of consciousness. If he is Gautama, of course he will have a kind of Devachan of his own, but there are children who have had no consciousness at all.

Mr. Burrows: What form will their incarnation take?

Blavatsky: A child who dies is but a mistake of nature, a failure.

Mr. Gardner: It is sometimes the same with parents.

Blavatsky: I don’t think so.

Mrs. Besant: Suppose you had a very noble type who had not evolved sufficiently to refuse Nirvana. Would he be obliged to reincarnate? He who had not reached quite far enough to remain?

Blavatsky: An adept who has not even reached and who may not reach Nirvana may remain as Nirmanakaya. He may refuse the higher state of Devachan, simply if he reached that point of consciousness in which there is no illusion possible for him—that he knows too much.

603 
Mr. Old: I thought perhaps there was a middle way.

Blavatsky: No sooner they are dead than there are some who step into another body where they can do good.

Mr. Burrows: And the more we eliminate desire the more we escape from Devachan?

Blavatsky: Certainly.

Keightley: The man I was thinking of was Dramar.216 I think I heard you say he would incarnate very speedily.

Mr. Old: This is the last question on Devachan. Physical rest may be accomplished in the same and even less time than the period of wakeful consciousness and activity. Why then should Devachan extend to twenty or more times the short span of life?

Blavatsky: You had better ask Karma this question, for I cannot answer you.

Mr. Old: Is not there any theory then in the Vedanta philosophy?

Blavatsky: I teach you the occult philosophy. Really, I don’t know; it is too difficult.

Mr. Old: Then we go on with questions on reincarnation. Can any reason be given for the necessity of reincarnation?

Keightley: The first great reason is, on no other hypothesis can you account for the inequalities of life—not only of condition and of circumstances under which a man is born, but inequalities in the actual inborn faculties and powers of the man himself, his mental powers, his moral force, his development in all respects—unless you have some antecedent existence. In the first place, whether you assume it to be on this earth or some other state, unless you assume some other existence for the man, it is impossible to account for the varying conditions of life, with any appearance of justice whatever.

604 
Mr. Burrows: You will never get your equilibrium.

Keightley: The great thing to my mind is, you don’t account for the different stages of development in which the people are obviously born. If neither preexisted, how does that difference come in? I have always thought the fundamental idea of the Christian heaven was injustice in this respect. They say there the poor man, the man who has had little or no chances, is to be rewarded by heaven for the very little good he has done; the man who has had very little or no temptation owing to his low state of development. But a very highly developed man is exposed to much more temptation, yet he is to be weighed, so to speak, in the same scale as the other man.

Mr. Burrows: They take the other side of it though—they rather teach the poor that because of their suffering they are going to be rewarded by and bye. Of course, that is the pastoral idea.

Keightley: If you make an eternal idea, where is the proportion?

Mr. Sneyd: Supposing we say Parabrahm is a state of indifference. Do you think it is a state to be desired? Do you think a state which is not a happy state is a state we should desire?

Blavatsky: I can’t understand this. How can you be happy, if you are not unhappy? You won’t appreciate happiness unless you have the contrast. Happiness or unhappiness is a thing which is of very little moment indeed, which begins this moment and ends three moments afterwards. How can you have such transitory and such evanescent ideas, which can have no relation whatever to the {in}finite?

Keightley: Anyone who studies the facts of their own consciousness must have found his active, definite consciousness is neither happiness nor unhappiness.

Mr. Sneyd: Is it to be desired?

Keightley: It is eminently to be desired, because it is a great

605 
deal more permanent and useful condition than either happiness or unhappiness.

Mr. Sneyd: It is a quietude, a sort of peace.

Keightley: I should not call it quietude or peace. It is a thing for which we have not got any very good expressions in the English language.

Mr. Old: How do you account for the association of persons on this earth plane as an apparent result of reincarnation?

Keightley: Karma.

Mr. Old: Then we may always presume that we have met before.

Blavatsky: You may.

Mrs. Besant: And does the mental condition influence that at all? Supposing people have reached something of the same mental state, will there be a tendency, then?

Blavatsky: Don’t you always experience when you meet a person for the first time whether you like that person, whether you are drawn towards him or have an antipathy? Even the dogs have their sympathies and their antipathies. It must be some reason, some cause.

Mr. Old: It must have been a past cause, if you have not met before. Then can a person of strong will, by a persistent effort, determine the conditions of the next incarnation?

Blavatsky: You go, my dear sir, into the domain of the adept, into the region of creation.

Mr. Old: That is the only person who has the strong will?

Blavatsky: Of course, desire has a great deal to do with it. An intense desire creates the circumstances, and creates the conditions.

Mr. Old: Then the last question is: “How far do the psychic, mental,

606 
and spiritual attainments of the past incarnations advantage the ego in its new life?”

Blavatsky: There is always the reflection that if you worked you cannot become an adept in one life. It is impossible. You must have begun desire for adeptship and for knowledge many, many previous incarnations before, because you may have a great desire for it, and you may be born in a man whose circumstances and conditions make him forget that and lose sight of that desire. You will be incarnated ten times, and then these desires and longings for knowledge come in. Then again you go perhaps to a life where it cannot be gratified. There are no conditions to develop this thing, and then you become all that which you had in the previous life, and it all comes in the present life.

Keightley: Until you go to several successive lives in which by effort the man has worked himself into a favorable condition.