

Blavatsky: Now you have got to study for yourselves. The only thing I can give you is just to put the “Key” in your hands and say: “This opens this way, and this that way,” and so on. You understand that whereas one person will understand well, another will understand less.

Mrs. Gordon: Becauseyoumusthave the possibilityof understanding transcendental ideas.

Blavatsky: No, it is not that. You have been many years in India and yet you have never taken any pleasure in those ancient religions; others have given their practice to the study of it. Now, if all these Orientalists were not such terrible materialists, with the knowledge they have—I speak about the Max Müllers, not the Sir Monier Williams, 217 because he has no more spirituality in him than this chair—but about him and others, they would understand perfectly; but they won’t, they are materialists. Even that which they understand they would not accept; they would not permit themselves; but I don’t see what there is that you don’t understand. Mr. Kingsland, you have summarized it beautifully. What are all complaining of?

Mr. Old: That is a broad question, HPB

608 
Blavatsky: You will end by saying it is all flapdoodle, and that there is nothing to understand.

Mrs. Gordon: I don’t think we can expect to understand it all.

Blavatsky: But these ladies and gentlemen who have been here Thursday after Thursday for, I suppose, a year, I don’t see that you don’t understand it. How is it possible?

Mrs. Gordon: You may accept things intellectually without saying you understand them. You may accept them as being true theories.

Blavatsky: Take it vice versa. Take it there are persons who feel it is a truth, and yet intellectually, on scientific grounds, they would not take it.

Keightley: Take the one point Kingsland touched on.

Blavatsky: You have to use your high faculty; intellect has nothing to do here. Materialistic science would step in.

Mrs. Gordon: It is a spiritual conception, as it were.

Keightley: Take that point you touched upon, Kingsland, for instance, how to conceive of the relation between these celestial hierarchies of Dhyan-Chohans and the physical forces, or what we call physical forces, if you like, with which we are ordinarily familiar. Of course, these physical forces, according to The Secret Doctrine, are the effects produced on the plane of Maya, the plane of objectivity, proceeding through or caused by these hierarchies; but the difficulty is how to understand, how to form to one’s self a conception of what that means.

Mr. Kingsland: I confess I have not been able to form a conception. I have only got the general idea.

Blavatsky: Every hierarchy relates to some force in nature. There are seven fundamental forces in nature; there are seven hierarchies. Now, to come and say that I will undertake to explain to you every one of the seven, which may be subdivided ad infinitum,

609 
is impossible. In the first place, if I know what it means, I am not scientific enough to come and give you the correspondences in scientific terms. I only know that not only every hierarchy and the Dhyan-Chohans, but every one of those that have been mentioned, correspond; and it may be shown how they correspond to the forces in nature. That would necessitate ten volumes, not two.

Keightley: Take, for instance, this question: There is a well-known property of matter which is called chemical affinity, the combining power which varies from substance to substance; certain things you can take hold of and touch and our physical senses respond to them. How to conceive corresponding relations of things on the next plane above our own, to the next plane behind the objective plane? Because those combinations, I take it, in the objective plane—say, of oxygen and hydrogen to form water—can only take place because the things on the next plane behind ours are also related in some way which corresponds to the relation that we see in the physical substances of oxygen and hydrogen, and so on.

Blavatsky: To whom did you address this speech? To Mr. Kingsland, or me?

Keightley: To you and Mr. Kingsland.

Blavatsky: I did not hear half of what you said. I want a definite question, and I cannot afford to answer about two pages of uninterrupted speech. This may sound very pretty, but I want to have a definite question; otherwise, before you end, I forget what you began.

Mr. Kingsland: These forces, what we call natural forces, are simply emanations from one or other of these hierarchies; that is the term you use—“emanations.”

Blavatsky: I have not any better word.

Mr. Kingsland: How can we dissociate that as an emanation from a hierarchy?

610 
Blavatsky: With physical means, you cannot. Mr. Crookes has done the best he could, and certainly he is the greatest chemist in the whole world.

Mr. Kingsland: Bert has taken one particular thing, chemical affinity. How are we to connect that with an intelligent entity on a higher plane?

Blavatsky: Well, look here! If you are prepared to tell me that everything that shows some action is an action which has its laws, and a scientist may tell you beforehand how such and such a thing may become definite and fixed affinity; if you are prepared to tell me there are no intentions behind it, I will say alright. I say there is not the smallest thing in the universe—there is not the contact of two atoms, take any two things in nature—there is certainly an intelligence in them, behind them, and they act through intelligence, in intelligence, and we are all immersed in intelligence.

Keightley: That is what we believe is at the basis, but Kingsland’s difficulty is how to think intellectually of the relation between that intelligence and the physical facts that we observe.

Blavatsky: To drop entirely your scientific and your inductive methods and become not a physician but a metaphysician, that is the only thing I can tell you. Once that you become instead of a metaphysician a physician, and take it from the standpoint of physical nature and mix up orthodox science, you will never arrive at anything.

Keightley: I don’t think that is what Kingsland was doing.

Blavatsky: By knowing better than you do everything from the first beginning, from the first flutter of differentiation. Learn it just as I learned. I am not a scientific person at all. I am simply a metaphysician. I have been looking at it; I know it, I feel it in me, I see it before me. I could not put it in scientific terms, because I am not scientific enough; but I say that it is the easiest thing in the world to trace it if you begin by the beginning, but if you do as the men of

611 
science do, and begin by the tail, and by that which appears here on this plane of illusion, you will never arrive at anything.

Mr. Sargeant: It seems the question is very simple. If there is no correspondency between the seven hierarchies and the manifestations of these physical forces on the physical plane, then there can be no correspondency between cause and effect. We know effect proceeds from cause; and we should know that the seven manifestations on this physical plane must proceed from one of the hierarchies.

Mr. Kingsland: You can’t always trace the effect to a theological cause.

Blavatsky: Shall I tell you a mistake, gentlemen, that you fall into? It is because you take independently all these causes that you want to call intelligent, that you take them one by one, instead of taking the whole. You cannot come and take this affinity. Let us take the Fohatic hierarchies, which are all for the electrical phenomena. You must take them in conjunction with all others, and take them as a whole; because, you see, science is perfectly right from its physical standpoint to say that they are blind forces of nature, because science does not see farther than its nose, and it does not permit itself to go farther than its plane of physical manifestations. But, if we go from the beginning, and if we imagine to ourselves this one life, this eternal, omnipresent homogeneity, that which underlies every phenomenon in nature—which underlies nature itself—which I won’t call spirit, because it is far more than spirit (Spirit is something definite, in our language it has no name; it can have only existence in our perception, and then only when we are perfectly divorced from matter.)—but you have to take the whole thing and then proceed from the universals to the particulars. Otherwise you cannot grasp the thing. It is impossible. You have to skip many things, or to embrace it in a general sense, and then begin it in the first manifestation that you can; otherwise, you cannot make to yourself a clear representation. To me it is as clear and intelligible as can be. It may be because I am an innocent fool, but it has never presented to me any difficulty.

612 
Mr. Sargeant: Is it because ladies and gentlemen must first seek the kingdom of heaven?

Blavatsky: I don’t know, but it is quite on a different plane.

Mr. Sargeant: That would be from universals to particulars.

Blavatsky: If there is anything like a middle heaven, then it must be in the clouds, represented by those seraphs with the golden harps. That is what I understand by the kingdom of heaven.

Mr. Sargeant: Unfortunately, that in twelve hours time will be the kingdom of hell, because it will be below.

Mr. Old: It is not the general law that causes do proceed into effects that we wish to know.

Mr. Sargeant: Call it a fortuitous combination of circumstances.

Keightley: What Old was after was that here are a lot of effects; well, when we talk about the higher intellectual hierarchies, they are only represented to us by words, at the present moment.

Blavatsky: They cannot be represented by words, they must be represented by the feeling of intuition. If they are represented by words, you have nothing, you have a flapdoodle. You have to represent them to yourselves in your intellectual perception, in your spiritual perception. It is impossible. It is with your higher self that you must understand, and not with your brains and intellectual perceptions, which are all sensuous perceptions, and will not help you. You have to reach to that point when you feel yourself one with the whole, and perfectly inseparable from it—from the one and the eternal, which has no end and no beginning. Otherwise, it is impossible.

Mrs. Gordon: The higher consciousness.

Blavatsky: Well, the higher consciousness. Maybe I speak to you Greek and Hebrew, but to me it is perfectly clear, and I don’t know how to explain it better.

613 
Keightley: The thing has to be understood by direct consciousness, the direct contact—your consciousness having been attuned to the universal consciousness. Then you are in direct contact with those hierarchies, and you perceive them or sense them.

Blavatsky: Why should not you put yourself as these hierarchies?

Mr. Kingsland: Which in fact you are.

Mrs. Gordon: Then we have a dual consciousness. The higher consciousness, it is, that we must cultivate, and in some way bring it en rapport with our inner consciousness. That is what, of course, the men in India do—they bring their higher consciousness into outer consciousness.

Mr. Sargeant: Are not all higher truths which can be perceived through the universe perceived through the automatic flow of thought?

Blavatsky: I don’t think so. I don’t believe it.

Mr. Sargeant: It is a thought of which we are partially conscious on the higher plane, but not on the lower plane.

Mr. Kingsland: But what is that but the intuition? You are only giving it another name. It is intuition, is it not?

Mr. Sargeant: I don’t think we can call it so. We may intuitively know a thing without understanding it.

Blavatsky: You may intuitively know a thing without being able to give it expression, but you must understand it. You understand it in your spiritual understanding, but very likely you cannot give it an expression, because the European languages cannot convey it; not even Sanskrit, which is certainly a thousand times richer. These are things you have to use your soul language for, as it is called—the inner perception and the unspoken language.

Mr. Sargeant: May we not intuitively know that a certain cause will

614 
yield a certain effect, without knowing the way in which that effect will be yielded?

Blavatsky: Certainly there is not the smallest effect that can be produced without a cause, and certainly if there is an effect there must be a cause.

Mr. Sargeant: Then intuition can exist with partial knowledge?

Mr. Old: I don’t think you can call that the inner aspect of Manas or the mind, because, you see, we identify the faculty of intuition with Buddhi, which is a separate principle.

Blavatsky: Not quite; it is Manas that you have to identify first.

Mr. Kingsland: It is the essence of all your reincarnations.

Mr. Old: Manas is?

Mr. Kingsland: No, intuition is.

Blavatsky: It passes through the incarnating ego.

Keightley: If you had Buddhi by itself, without any conjunction with Manas on this plane, you would have no intuition at all.

Blavatsky: The mission of Buddhi is simply to shadow divine light on Manas, otherwise Manas will be always falling into the Karmic {Kamic} principle, into the principle of matter; it will become the lower Manas, and act as the lower Manas or mind. But the incarnating ego is certainly the mind, the Manas.

Keightley: And intuition is the recollection.

Blavatsky: Of all the past accumulated experiences.

Mr. Old: But they would be sublimated.

Mr. Kingsland: How is it that one man’s intuition will make a

615 
Theosophist of him, and another man’s will make a Roman Catholic of him?
