
Mr. Sargeant: Because a Roman Catholic is a Theosophist. It must necessarily be so, if Theosophy embodies all the wisdoms of known religions. All the Roman Catholics are really Theosophists.

Blavatsky: So far, I know only of one real Theosophist among the Roman Catholics: it was poor Father Damien. But not at all because he was a Roman Catholic, but because he was a real Christ- like man.

Mr. Old: Don’t you claim St Aloysius218 as such?

Blavatsky: Fanaticism we cannot believe in, and we must not believe in. We say there is truth in everything, for it is impossible a thing should exist without having some leaven of truth.

Mr. Sargeant: And consequently there is Theosophy in everything, even in fanaticism.

Keightley: Fanaticism is the negation of the first principle of Theosophy, which is universalism.

Blavatsky: Fanaticism is nothing but concentrated selfishness and vanity. A man says: “I believe in it, and therefore it must be so. I am the one wise man and everyone else must be a fool.” He who is a fanatic shuts himself out of the universal truth. He simply sticks to a little thing like a fly sticks to one of those medicated papers. It is just that and nothing else.

Mr. Sargeant: What about Peter the Hermit,219 whose fierce preaching stirred up the whole of Europe? Was he a Theosophist?

Blavatsky: Not a bit of it. He was an anti-Theosophist. He forced people to make fools of themselves and led them to death,

616 
and made them ridiculous to posterity. He represented to them the goose as the Holy Ghost.

Mr. Sargeant: And yet with the views these people came back with from the Holy Land, Christianity became something grand. Our ancestors never knew the principle of toleration on the battlefield until Saladin taught them.220

Blavatsky: There was more Theosophy in Saladin than there ever was in Peter the Hermit. Perhaps you will say Louis XI221 was also a Theosophist. You are a paradoxalist.

Mr. Kingsland: It is a universalist. But then you must make a distinction in terms.

Mr. Sargeant: There is no distinction in spirit.

Keightley: But you see, we are not in the spirit, but in the flesh.

Mr. Sargeant: The great error of today is that man imagines he is a body possessed of a spirit, instead of a spirit possessed of a body.

Blavatsky: My dear Sargeant, you would appear to me the embodiment of wisdom, if you spoke in a way that I could hear.

Mr. Sargeant: If it is that I speak low, it is because of those internal breathings.

Blavatsky: You are a humbug! Perhaps he will say there is real Theosophy in humbug.

Keightley: Perhaps I might quote the lines of Olcott: “There’s a spirit above, and a spirit below; A spirit of love, and a spirit of woe; The spirit above is the spirit divine; The spirit below is the spirit of wine!”

617 
Mr. Sargeant: And yet the “spirit of wine” is only an expression of the “spirit divine.” If you read your esoterical works, you will see what affinities there were between these things.

Blavatsky: Now this man’s intuition tells him you are trying to humbug me; he does not understand English, and yet his intuition tells him that. You are trying to tease me, he says.

Mr. Old: I wanted to say I didn’t think I was agreeable to the proposition. But unconscious thought, cerebration—no, ratiocination—not the physical action which is called cerebration, but the higher, the metaphysical correspondence—this unconscious thought is not in itself intuition, because, reasoning from analogies, we have these two things represented on the lowest plane which we can apply to every one of the seven principles. There is in nerves—the automatic arc of nerves and the influential arc of nerves—the voluntary and involuntary. Exactly the same with the vital process; there is the voluntary and involuntary. There are functions over which we have voluntary control, and there are those over which we have none, except in strange, complex cases like Captain Townsend and others who are able to control the vital processes as well as the muscles. Seeing there is the unconscious and the conscious, the dark and the light side of every bifacial monad, might we not argue that there is the conscious and the unconscious cerebration, both identified with Manas? Because I have seen instances precipitated in the form of automatic writing where a person has been holding a conversation on one subject and writing on another.

Mr. Kingsland: Supposing we say that intuition is the unconscious action?

Mr. Old: I wish to say it is not.

Mr. Kingsland: You take the unconscious vital action, for instance. The action goes on without your will. How does that come about? Is not that the accumulation of numerous past experiences?

Mr. Sargeant: No.

618 
Mr. Kingsland: What is it, then?

Mr. Sargeant: It is simply owing to the action of a universal flood on nerves which are termed involuntary. They affect these nerves in such a manner that they restore any equilibrium which has been lost.

Mr. Kingsland: How does it arise that we have certain physical functions? You are simply tracing it back. I say those functions develop through innumerable ages by means of evolution; these things act through the Kama-rupa experience of past action.

Mr. Sargeant: You don’t mean that the past experiences are the very causes that set these influences at work?

Mr. Kingsland: I don’t. I carry that analogy up to what Old says about the conscious and the unconscious ratiocination. I say that the unconscious is simply that same result. By analogy you can put it in the same way: that your intuition is the result of all the past stages you have gone through in the stages of consciousness—in fact, your evolution.

Keightley: I think it works out from the known experience of the training of the muscles. You learn to do certain very complicated muscular actions at first with great pain and difficulty, such as writing. Gradually the thing becomes automatic; you do it without thinking of the different steps. You think of the sense you are going to express, and you do not think of the individual movement of your hand.

Mr. Kingsland: There is nothing you can do at the present moment but what is the result of your past experiences.

Mr. Old: I can trace it in what the physicists call inhibited action. If one gets into the way of nursing his thumb in his pocket, it is a strange thing how this will become habitual. First of all, it is generally voluntary, but it becomes a habit, and it is then called an inhibited action. And the seat of the cerebral forces is the [  ] {cerebrum}; it is supposed to be the lieutenant of the thinking brain. Then, when you have decided to walk home, you don’t have to think of putting more

619 
than the first foot foremost; the rest follow. What I wish to say is this: I find some difficulty in tracing this inhabited {inhibited} action which has once been voluntary action. How can you say that vital action was ever inhibited, was ever involuntary? If you can prove that each pulsation of the aorta of the heart was controlled voluntarily, then you prove the case.

Mr. Kingsland: Your present physical body is the result of several influences which can be traced back to a previous incarnation.

Mr. Keightley: The point is this: whether, for instance, the involuntary action of the muscles—as in the beating of the heart—is the result of evolution. I contend it is the result of the evolution of the molecules forming the heart.

Mr. Old: But not of conscious experiences.

Mr. Kingsland: Not in your present lifetime.

Mr. Old: I merely wish to show, reasoning by analogy, just as there was the conscious and unconscious action of the physical body, and there were conscious and unconscious systems of nervation and so forth on the physical plane, so there was in every principle this conscious and unconscious, this dark and light side.

Blavatsky: I think you confuse the material things with the spiritual.

Mr. Old: We know every one of those principles has a manifesting and an unmanifesting side.

Blavatsky: If you speak of one of the acquired habits, as nursing your thumb, it is a different thing. It is not a thing which is natural and normal. The beating of the heart is a thing which pretends to the physical, the habits of men. This has nothing to do with acquired things.

Mr. Kingsland: It has nothing to do with the acquired habits in this incarnation. But you can trace back the beating of your heart, which

620 
takes place automatically; you can trace that back to the evolution, where it was first.

Blavatsky: Certainly.

Mr. Old: I cannot go so far as that.

Mr. Kingsland: Suppose we take your analogy?

Mr. Old: Reasoning from this by analogy, on this line I wanted to show that there would be conscious and unconscious thought, both identified with and peculiar to the Manas.

Mr. Kingsland: Very well, let us say that. Then I say that the conscious thought you are going through now is your present intellectuation.

Mr. Old: We have already identified intuition with Buddhi. Now you wish to identify Buddhi with the higher aspect of Manas.

Keightley: You are taking that from Sinnett, Old.

Mr. Old: Is not Buddhi the sixth principle, and is not intuition the sixth sense?

Blavatsky: You argue on the line of what? Do you bring the thing as it is given to you in the esoteric instructions, or the exoteric? There is the difference, you know what I mean. Exoterically, there is another thing. Of course, the Buddhi will be the sixth, for the Buddhi is quite a different thing, exoterically. The Buddhi, per se, has nothing to do with any qualification of anything; it is simply the vehicle of Atman, of spirit; and spirit is nothing; it cannot be said it is something; it is that which has neither beginning nor end; it is the one thing.

Keightley: Old’s identification of the Buddhi’s intuition is derived from Sinnett’s Esoteric Buddhism.

Blavatsky: That is certainly not esoteric.

Mr. Kingsland: You cannot identify Buddhi with intuition, because intuition, after all, is only the intellectual process of the very highest

621 
order.

Mr. Old: I understand there are two facets to Buddhi?

Blavatsky: One thing you may say about Buddhi. Intuition is in Manas for the more or less light shed on it by Buddhi, whether it is assimilated much or little with Buddhi.

Mr. Kingsland: It must pass through Manas. It is derived from Manas.

Mr. Old: Ultimately it is from the brain; it can flow down. The brain is the instrument of thought.

Blavatsky: My poor Old! I never thought you were as materialistic as you are.

Mr. Old: You have put me off the track by asking me the question whether I was speaking esoterically or exoterically. I was talking on my ground, and you told me to get off.

Blavatsky: Was I wrong?

Mr. Old: No, you were right.

Blavatsky: There are esotericists here, and exotericists. The esotericists will be terribly confused if we speak in this way, and the exotericists still more.

Mr. Old: I ought not to have mooted it.
