
Blavatsky: Buddhi by itself can neither have intuition, nor non-intuition, nor anything; it is simply the cementing link, so to say, between the higher spirit and Manas. What goes into Devachan? What reincarnates? It is certainly the ego, the Manas, the higher portion of Manas. Once in Devachan we call it the eternity, but it has no eternity at all, because Buddhi and Atma are nothing but obstructions, in the strict sense of the word. It is the reincarnating Manas that goes; and therefore intuition belongs to Manas, because it brings it through all the reincarnations that it passed through. All

622 
this is more or less defined through the amount of light shed on Manas by Buddhi, but so far as regards this life. You understand? Because the intuition is one. You have learned enough about that, Mrs. Gordon.

Mr. Old: What is your distinction, Kingsland, between unconscious cerebration and intuition?

Mr. Kingsland: Unconscious cerebration is a thing belonging purely to the physical plane, and the other thing is different.

Mr. Old: So is unconscious thought, then?

Mr. Kingsland: Take the extreme case of the lad who could solve the most difficult mathematical problems that were given him immediately without any reference to figures at all. That you will say was a purely intellectual process. He must have had it in previous times; he had assimilated that knowledge at some time or other, and it was owing to certain combinations of astral influences that he was able to make use of that information, for the time being, in that rapid manner. His physical senses overclouded this, in time.

Mr. Sargeant: That is the product of unconscious thought.

Blavatsky: Unconscious cerebration is something that was suggested to the brain unconsciously to yourselves, though perhaps you heard it or saw it and had no remembrance of it; and there it comes out. But, intuition is a different thing.

Keightley: I don’t think such a term as “unconscious thought” can mean anything.

Mr. Sargeant: Then “unconscious cerebration”?

Keightley: “Unconscious thought”—what meaning can you attach to the phrase?

Mr. Old: Call it ideation, if you like.

Keightley: It is conscious enough on the right plane.

623 
Mr. Old: There is nothing unconscious, as a matter of fact. Because, if you only identify your consciousness for the time being with that plane, you would be perfectly conscious you were so engaged; therefore, I think the term is a bad one, and I only wish to use it relatively, in contradistinction to relative thought.

Mrs. Gordon: It seems to me that the experiments that have been made in regard to hypnotism show that there is this higher consciousness which may be brought forward occasionally under exceptional circumstances—that is, with exceptional natures. It is not everyone in whom it can be developed. Don’t you think so, Madame? I am speaking of the latent soul. The other half which is not unconscious can be, as it were, more or less exhibited under some forms of hypnotism, in which the higher self becomes clairvoyant, and the other faculties always develop.

Blavatsky: Don’t you use the term “higher self.” That is the Atman.

Keightley: Say the higher ego. In most cases, that consciousness or ego refers to the personality in the third person speaking, for instance, of the name.

Mr. Kingsland: I take it in this way: that we have stored up, so to speak, in our Manas an enormous amount of experience that we have passed through in past incarnations, and we are not able by certain reasons of our physical constitution to assimilate and give expression to all that in our present lifetime, but the act of making use of your intuition is simply the act of getting at this storehouse that you have already in your Manas, and what it is that clouds our intuition is our connection with {the} physical plane, and if we can get rid of that, we can make use of our intuition.

Blavatsky: It is the amount of weeds and parasites that we have collected in our life which makes us positively fools.

Mrs. Gordon: You always see children much more intuitive than adults. Children have the intuition much more prominent than we

624 
who live in the world and are more of the world, and our minds are exercised in connection with worldly things.

Mr. Kingsland: I think that also is the case.

Mrs. Gordon: I have seen it myself, among friends of my own. They had a sixth sense, as I may say. They lived in another atmosphere altogether, you see.

Mr. Kingsland: There are a great many cases in which that is brought forward—abnormal cases, such as I have mentioned. Take the case of Josef Hofmann, the young pianist. Where does his musical knowledge come from? It is nothing but intuition. He is able to give expression to that on the physical plane through his physical body.

Mrs. Gordon: Of course the child has not learned it intellectually. He has not brain enough to do it. He has brought it with him.

Mr. Kingsland: The basis of all our actions is simply intuition.

Blavatsky: Is it your Buddhi, Old, that made you what you are?

Mr. Old: It is my Atma.

Blavatsky: You have got no Atma, distinct from others.

Mr. Old: There is the divine spark in me.

Blavatsky: It is not yours; it is common property. It is your ego, and your incarnating ego. It is that which you were in past lives that makes you what you are, a young man of 25 that has such a wonderful capacity of grasping all these things.

Mr. Old: There are certain things—as, for instance, these abstract meditations—which are not the result of experience. What experience, what self-consciousness have I when I am in Devachan? I have no relative consciousness except my own that forms the creation in my own mind.

Mr. Kingsland: And yet you believe that Devachan is the result of

625 
your experiences that you have passed through in your previous life.

Mr. Old: Certainly. But there are other abstract problems which are thinkable and cognizable by me which it is perhaps impossible to formulate, but which I can feel; and I say that these laws, this consciousness, belongs to Atma. It is related to Manas by its vehicle Buddhi, and therein this absolute consciousness is, to a certain extent, capable of being appreciated by the Manas, the monad.

Blavatsky: You are a heretic, because you speak entirely against not only the occult philosophy, but against the Vedantin philosophy.

Mr. Kingsland: Does Atma accumulate experiences?

Mr. Old: No! But you have got hold of the idea that it is only accumulated experience that we know.

Mr. Kingsland: It is only accumulated experience which is our intuition.

Blavatsky: How can you give experience to that which is absolute? How is it possible to fall into such a philosophical error as that? The Atma no more belongs to you than to this lamp; it is common property.

Mr. Old: Every higher self is, so to speak, the manifested end of a ray.

Blavatsky: It is not; it is the Manas itself.

Mr. Old: There is the individual logos, as well as the universal logos.

Blavatsky: Not at all. It is simply that Atma and Buddhi cannot be predicated as having anything to do with a man, except that man is immersed in them; so long as he lives he is overshadowed by these two; but it is no more the property of that than of anything else.

Mr. Old: This is identifying Atman with Jiva.

626 
Blavatsky: I beg a thousand pardons. Jiva and Atma are one, only Jiva is this end, and Atma at the highest end; but you cannot make the difference in England. It would have a meaning for the Sanskrit, but not in the European languages, or any of them, because there is but one essence in the universe, and this has neither beginning nor end, and the various shadows or rays of that absoluteness during the period of differentiation, this is that which makes it the final essence of everything, and of man.

Mr. Old: Then would you say that all this which is written of Nirvana of Brahmâ, of Para-Nirvana, of Para-Brahm, is the result of experience?

Mr. Kingsland: All that you can understand of it, that is the result of experience.

Mr. Old: I take it as the result of intuition.

Blavatsky: It is simply a symbol expressed in the best language in which man is capable of expressing it, that is all.

Keightley: Try to formulate your idea more clearly by explaining what kind of meditation you refer to, because I think you will find that the very highest meditation you can conceive of is really Manasic, and nothing more. Manas and experience are not synonymous.

Mr. Old: Kingsland wishes to identify intuition with experience. According to Kingsland, intuition is one aspect of Manas.

Blavatsky: Look here, you Europeans ought never to have been given the seven principles. Well, perhaps in a hundred years you will understand it. It would be a thousand times better to hold to the old methods, those that I have held to in Isis Unveiled, and to speak about triple man: spirit, soul, and matter; then you would not fall into the heresies, in such heresies as you do. Why do we divide this into seven parts or aspects? Because ours is the highest philosophy. But, for the general mortal, certainly it is a great deal easier to understand if they say man is triple: he has got spirit, soul,

627 
and matter. What is spirit? Spirit then becomes the ego. Soul is simply the Nephesh, the living soul of every animal, that is to say, the lower Jiva, and matter is his physical body. Now, we, having divided it, as all esoteric philosophies divide it, have simply confused the European mind, because it has not been trained in that direction. It is too early for them, and there are very few men who will really understand the seven divisions. And, therefore, we are called lunatics or frauds—one of the two—and nobody will understand what we mean. I say it is a thousand times better not to understand it, and not to go and speak about this septenary number, and simply take it on the old ground of spirit, soul and matter. There would be no heresy, then.

Mr. Kingsland: It has been broached abroad now, this seven principle, and we have to clear our ideas of it.

Blavatsky: You must never say: “my Atma”; you have no Atma; this idea is the curse of the world; it has produced this tremendous selfishness, this egotism [  ] we say “we are,” “my Atma,” “my Buddhi”. Who are you? You are nobodies; you are something today, and tomorrow you are not. Even that disappears at the end of the Manvantara in the one.

Keightley: To go back to what Kingsland was saying. Intuition as we know it is defined in this way: the memory, the action or the reflection on our lower plane of the hierarchies. It is not the higher aspect of the hierarchies, nor does it exhaust the Manas.

Blavatsky: The incarnating principle simply. It is not something that is an individual or entity. It is simply the highest mind.

Mr. Old: That incarnating ego consists of what?

Blavatsky: What do you want it to consist of? Plums, or oranges, or what?

Mr. Old: How do you formulate it? Do you say it is Atma-Buddhi?

628 
Blavatsky: I say it is Atma-Buddhi, certainly. Because, in every incarnation, it is under the direct ray of Buddhi, if he wants to assimilate. If he does not want to, it is his look out; his personality will drop out. It is only in the case which assimilates Buddhi that it really lives throughout, and will belong to that string of personality which forms consciousness after the Manvantara is at an end—the direct, immortal ray.

Mr. Old: I thought I was quite right in saying Buddhi was a ray from Atma; it is that vehicle.

Blavatsky: You would not call this lamp a ray of the flame that burns in it, would you?

Mr. Old: Certainly not.

Blavatsky: That is Buddhi, if you please—the vehicle. It is not a ray; it is only that through which that ray passes. It is the agent of that light that it throws on Buddhi. How is that we read in all those books about Nirvana and Atma, when they say: “Does Parabrahm exist? It does not. Then Parabrahm is not. Yes it is, but it does not exist.”

Mr. Old: You say the incarnating ego consists of Buddhi-Manas, or rather Atma-Buddhi.

Blavatsky: It consists only of itself.

Mr. Kingsland: In the aspect in which we are discussing, it is simply the assimilation of the higher Manas.

Mr. Old: What assimilates it?
