
Blavatsky: Consciousness. It is universal consciousness, which falling into matter becomes personal consciousness in its last manifestation on earth. And when it gets rid of all the matter that impedes it, when it becomes more and more pure, and finally it reaches its highest manifestation, or whatever you call it, then it gradually falls into the universal consciousness; it is again reabsorbed

629 
into universal consciousness. That is what Manas is. But as it falls lower and lower, it would be nothing but a material entity—I don’t mean material physically, but material de facto, nothing but a bundle of nothing—if it were not under the ray of this Atma-Buddhi. But Atma-Buddhi certainly does not follow the reincarnating ego. Simply, once it is reincarnated, they are again in the region of the universe in which there is Atma and Buddhi, therefore, we say that Atma and Buddhi exist in every man.

Mr. Old: It is a contradiction between the undifferentiated Atman and Buddhi.

Blavatsky: It is simply that Atma is beyond the seventh plane. Buddhi is one of the planes; you understand that. Therefore, if Atma, which is beyond the seventh plane, falls on the ego through seven planes, it will fall a great deal weaker. You understand what I mean? It depends on our ego to draw it immediately on itself, or to have a kind of wall between it and the other planes. This depends on the degree of assimilation. I don’t know if you understand my meaning.

Keightley: Yes, you put it very well.

Blavatsky: Well, it is extremely difficult to do so, because those who don’t understand what I mean by planes will not understand me. It has seven degrees of spirit-matter, and certainly it depends on the force or degree, the intensity with which it assimilates, and if it is too opaque, and too dull, then certainly it won’t reach it.

Keightley: I don’t know whether you ever studied that problem, Old, the definition of liberation. There is always that rather puzzling explanation: “the soul is neither bound, nor is it ever liberated.” It is a very intricate problem, which has never been really satisfactorily explained.

Blavatsky: What do you take Purusha to be on this plane? Which of the principles? To which of the principles does it belong?

Keightley: They talk about Purusha mounting on the shoulders of Prakriti.

630 
Blavatsky: Prakriti is simply a body, and therefore the body would be a perfectly blind animal if Pursha were not there; and Purusha without the body could not manifest. Purusha emanates from Brahmâ, and from [  ], or from [  ], whatever school he belonged to.

Keightley: I could show passages in which Purusha is not taken in that sense, but in the higher sense.

Blavatsky: If you speak about mind, Purusha corresponds with the ego. If you take it in the universal sense, then it corresponds to the universal soul, to the Anima Mundi.

Mr. Kingsland: I think you might look at it in this light: by analogy, it is exactly the same as the way in which we require to postulate for the descending scale of manifestation—first the manifesting spirit, then the first Logos, and then the second. Isn’t it the same?

Mr. Old: Who is your first Logos in this case?

Mr. Kingsland: It is Buddhi, and the second is Manas.

Mr. Old: A short time ago I ventured the remark that Buddhi was the Logos, and I was told that I was incorrect.

Keightley: You spoke of an individual Logos.

Mr. Old: Of an individual ray—because Atma has to radiate in order to function any particular—

Blavatsky: Atma has to radiate! It cannot radiate anything. Atma, if you take it of the third Logos, then yes, but not Atma in the universal sense of Parabrahm.

Mr. Old: We are not teaching Parabrahm here. If we entered Parabrahm, or if we entered into the consideration of Parabrahm, here would come in that intuition which I speak of.

Blavatsky: I thought I knew pretty well the philosophy, and I don’t think I know it. I never said that Atma or Parabrahm could

631 
radiate. If you take it in the sense of the third Logos, then I admit it radiates.

Mr. Kingsland: Correspondentially, Atma is Parabrahm.

Mr. Old: There is a source of confusion to an occidental mind; just the same with your juxtaposition of the two words Jiva and Prana, which throws everybody into confusion. I mean to say, your repetition of the language.

Keightley: The juxtaposition was sensed, and nobody ever took it up.

Blavatsky: The Brahmins have given it to us, and they all fell on me as to why I permitted Sinnett to do this. Sinnett never asked me my permission, and I did not know until Esoteric Buddhism came out. It is not my fault.

Mr. Old: Oh! No; only, in some parts of The Secret Doctrine it is difficult to tell if Jiva is to be taken on the noumenal plane or on the phenomenal.

Blavatsky: When you speak about the objective things then it is Jiva. (At least it is Prana.) When you speak about the universal life, then it is Jiva. In some schools of philosophy they call it Jiva; the Vedantins will call it Jiva; the Sankhya will never call it that, and the six schools are entirely distinct. That which the Vedantins call Jiva, others will call Prana, and vice versa.

Mr. Old: One conceives of abstract ideas apart from the formula. The formula is the matter of experience; it belongs to Manas.

Keightley: Don’t you conceive that it is the Manas which conceives the abstract ideas? Because, how do they exist, otherwise?

Mr. Kingsland: You cannot conceive of abstract ideas without the experience. That is just my point.

Mr. Old: Who was Hermes?

632 
Blavatsky: If you mix up the Greek gods with the philosophy, then we are lost.

Mr. Old: I will bear it.

Mr. Kingsland: But our brains won’t.

Blavatsky: Let us leave in quietude all these analogies.

Mr. Old: But this is our only key.

Keightley: Your argument is open to this reply. If abstract ideas can only be received in virtue of experience, how do you ever get your chain started?

Mr. Kingsland: By the first emanation. When you first emanate from the Absolute, it is when you begin your cycle of experiences.

Blavatsky: There is a potentiality of everything: past, present, and future.

Mr. Old: That is better. This is not experience.

Blavatsky: If you take the present Manavantara for the only one, then, of course, granted you are right.

Mr. Old: This is making two square walls meet, that the past, present, and future are comprehended in the now. It is a matter of experience. There are the future Manvantaras.

Blavatsky: What do you make of the past Manvantaras? If you were in the first, you would be right.

Mr. Old: You have no individual consciousness, in Parabrahm, in which you enter at the Maha-pralaya. I mean in Nirvana.

Blavatsky: You don’t understand what Nirvana is. It is absolute consciousness.

Mr. Old: There is no individual consciousness. How do we know anything about Nirvana?

633 
Mr. Kingsland: Do you believe that the future Manvantara will be an improvement upon the present one, or not?

Mr. Old: Yes! I do, because my experience has told me from what little I have seen that the law of nature is progression.

Mr. Kingsland: Is not that the same as saying it is experience?

Mr. Old: Plus analogy.

Mr. Kingsland: I am drawing the analogy now. I say you can carry it not only from your past life to the present, but from the past Manvantara to the next Manvantara.

Keightley: If you ever read Froude,222 he talks about the faculty of apprehending abstract ideas. HPB, answer this, if you can, from the point of view of exotericism. Is the apprehension of highest abstract ideas the function of Manas, or of Buddhi?

Blavatsky: Buddhi can have the apprehension of nothing.

Keightley: There you are answered, Old.

Mr. Old: Yes! Certainly.

Blavatsky: If we argue or discuss about the universe we had better leave the first two things—Parabrahm, and the first Logos, call it; and when we speak of men, let us remember that it is a perfect analogy—that that which we call Parabrahm in the first Logos is in man, Atma, and Buddhi. Then as we begin by the third or second Logos, so we must begin by Manas, because there it is where the point of differentiation begins, otherwise you are lost. You will only make confusion, otherwise.

Mr. Old: It is having to keep parallel texts before you all the time. Knowing certain teachings on the one side of the book, and trying to keep them parallel.

634 
Blavatsky: He will come and reproach us that he knows too much.

Mr. Old: I refer to esoteric teaching.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly; therefore, every time you put this question, I say, do go to bed, let us talk of something else; let us talk about exoteric subjects, of which we can discuss as much as you like, but the others—well, it is very difficult to speak of that which we had better keep silent about.




635
Appendix 1
[In the transcription of the meeting of January 10, 1889, page 4 is missing. An edited version of what it may have contained is supplied from pp. 5-6 of the original 1890 printed edition of The Transactions of the Blavatsky Lodge below. See also Transactions, pp. 4-5, The Theosophy Company, Los Angles, California, 1923.]

Q. What, then, are the seven layers of Space, for in the “Proem” we read about the “Seven-Skinned Mother-Father”?

A. Plato and Hermes Trismegistus would have regarded this as the Divine Thought, and Aristotle would have viewed this “Mother- Father” as the “privation” of matter. It is that which will become the seven planes of being, commencing with the spiritual and passing through the psychic to the material plane. The seven planes of thought or the seven states of consciousness correspond to these planes. All these septenaries are symbolized by the seven “Skins.”

Q. The divine ideas in the Divine Mind? But the Divine Mind is not yet.

A. The Divine Mind is, and must be, before differentiation takes place. It is called the divine Ideation, which is eternal in its Potentiality and periodical in its Potency, when it becomes Mahat, Anima Mundi or Universal Soul. But remember that, however you name it, each of these conceptions has its most metaphysical, most material, and also intermediate aspects.

Q. What is the meaning of the term “Ever invisible robes”?

A. It is, of course, as every allegory in the Eastern philosophies, a figurative expression. Perhaps it may be the hypothetical Protyle that Professor Crookes is in search of, but which can ce