
A. Keightley: The first question arises from what was stated at a previous meeting, when you said that it would take too long. We want to know if you will give us some explanation of the four and seven truths, even if it takes all the evening, as you said it would be too large a subject to deal with at the same time as others.

Blavatsky: Well, I will answer as follows: Everything about the four truths you can find in the Buddhist Catechism28 or any of the exoteric books, but I do not think you are ready, anyone of you, for the esoteric explanation of them; therefore I had better ask you to postpone this.

A. Keightley: Can anything that is esoteric be found in these exoteric books?

Blavatsky: You can find it in any manual of Buddhism; in Olcott’s book, for instance. There is nothing occult about it.

A. Keightley: Then how far is that exoteric side to be taken for anything real?

Blavatsky: It is real, because in the Buddhist church they practice it, and certainly the high priests know the truth about it,

60 
and they do not take the exoteric forms literally. As to the small fry and the laymen, they do.

A. Keightley: Then how far has that any value?

Blavatsky: It has a great value, because it is a discipline and it helps them to lead a good life and to have their mind fixed always on the spiritual.

A. Keightley: Then we pass on. The Secret Doctrine, Stanza 1, Sloka 5. “Darkness alone filled the boundless All.” Is “darkness” the same as the “Eternal Parent: Space,” spoken of in Sloka 1?

Blavatsky: How can it be the same thing? To me, Space is something already with attributes, at least in potentiality; it is differentiated matter, and “darkness” is something of which no attributes can be predicated, surely, for it is chaos; it is the Absoluteness. How can it be the same?

A. Keightley: But then is “darkness” there used in the sense of the opposite pole to light?

Blavatsky: Yes, the opposite pole to manifestation. “Darkness” means something that is perfectly void of any attributes or qualities—all negative.

B. Keightley: It is not opposed to light, then, but opposed to differentiation?

Blavatsky: There is no light yet.

B. Keightley: But it is really taken as the symbolism of negativeness.

Blavatsky: It is taken as that which you can find in the Bible, the void, “Tohu-va-bohu”29 as they call it, the “chaos”; as it is said: “everything was darkness, and on the darkness the spirit of God was.” Just the same as in that sense. There was nothing in it—in the

61 
Universe.

Kingsland: Is it that there is no light, or simply nothing to manifest it?

Blavatsky: There is nothing to manifest it. It is not darkness as absence of light, but it is darkness as Absoluteness in the absence of any manifestation.

Kingsland: Quite so; just the same as the Universal Mind we were discussing last time?

Blavatsky: Just so.

Col. Chowne: Then it says: “Light proceeds from Darkness.”

Blavatsky: After that. First comes light. Light is the first Logos—call it whatever you like—it is the non-manifested Logos. In the second Logos it is not the Creator, but the light. In the Vishnu Purana they do not call it even Brahmâ, because Brahmâ is an aspect of Vishnu in the Vishnu Purana. What they say is, it is Vishnu—all. Vishnu is and is not.

A. Keightley: Then what is the difference there between the derivations of Vishnu and Brahmâ, the spreading and the pervading?

Blavatsky: In the Vishnu Purana you will find Vishnu spoken of as the Absolute “No-Thing,” as the Ain Soph, that which is perfectly unknown, endless and incomprehensible. The Heavenly Man is its vehicle to manifest itself in the Universe when the Ain Soph becomes that celestial man. Just in the same way we deal with Vishnu in the Vishnu Purana, who will be spoken of as the Absolute; and then one of his aspects will be Brahmâ, the male, not the neuter, and after that he becomes everything. In the Veda you won’t find Vishnu prominently mentioned, nor Brahmâ. Vishnu is named in the Veda, but is not mentioned as anything of a high order. As to Brahmâ, he is not mentioned at all.

A. Keightley: Then that quotation, “For Father, Mother and

62 
Son were once more One”?

Blavatsky: Means that all that, the creative forces and the causing forces—if I may use the expression—and the effect of this cause is the Universe. Again, in the undifferentiated condition all was merged into one and was One. The Absolute is during the Pralaya, always.

A. Keightley: Second. What are the different meanings of the terms: Father, Mother and Son? For in the Commentary you explain them (a) as Spirit, Substance, and the Universe; (b) as Spirit, Soul and Body; (c) as the Universe, the Planetary Chain, and Man.

Blavatsky: Well, so they are. I think I have explained entirely. What can I say more? Unless you anthropomorphize them and make ideals of them, and deities, and put them as the Father, Mother and Son, as put all kinds of goddesses and gods. I do not see how I can explain it in any other way.

A. Keightley: Then take the last items of the series: I suppose “Son,” “Substance,” “Body” and “Man” correspond?30

Blavatsky: Certainly they do.

A. Keightley: Then why are “Father-Mother” linked together? And then the correspondence comes, “Spirit and Substance”; “Spirit and Soul”; and the “Universe and the Planetary Chain”; and the third term in the series seems to proceed from the other two.

Blavatsky: I put all the examples because it can be applied to anything. It can be applied to a planetary chain, it can be applied to the solar system, it can be applied to the whole Cosmos or anything you like. It is simply a figure of speech—a metaphor.

A. Keightley: But I think the point that I was meaning was this: you have Father and Mother and then you have the Son. The sentence seems to mean that the Son is distinct from the Father and the Mother, and that ultimately, in Pralaya, the Son is merged back

63 
again into the Father and Mother in a closer union.

Blavatsky: Remember, I do not speak about the period preceding what they call in common parlance “Creation.” I speak about the time after matter was differentiated, but before it began to assume form. I say in The Secret Doctrine I do not touch the thing which was pre-natal—if you can say that of the Cosmos. I do not touch this at all. Father-Mother simply means here the differentiated primeval substance, protyle, when it began to differentiate and became positive and negative, the active and the passive, and the Son, the production of the two, is the Son of the Universe, that is to say, of the universal forms.

A. Keightley: Then the ultimate state is the Laya state of Father, Mother and Son?

Blavatsky: Laya is that which remains during Pralaya, but also that which, in the manifested universe, is at the terminus of all matter. It is the zero-point. Now ask Bulaki Rama what Laya means. He knows and will explain it to you a great deal better than I. I say it is non-differentiated matter, the zero-point, as Crookes calls it. I don’t know how to describe in any other way, that point where indestructible substance becomes homogeneous, entirely and absolutely homogeneous, that is to say, and not objective.

A. Keightley: Then is that the point you are speaking of here, just at the time when the Father, Mother and Son become once more One?

Blavatsky: Yes, but I don’t know, I don’t think it is in The Secret Doctrine. I simply make reference to that which was before the Father-Mother period. If there is Father-Mother, then certainly there is no such condition as Laya.

B. Keightley: Father-Mother are later than the Laya condition.

Blavatsky: Certainly, individual objects may be in Laya, but the universe cannot be in Laya when Father-Mother appear there, as it is said in this Stanza.

64 
A. Keightley: That is the point I was meaning. Where the Son and the Father and the Mother reunite, there can be no differentiation at all.

Blavatsky: Certainly, it is the Laya, but not at that point you are talking about.

Col. Chowne: You explained it once as the essence.

Blavatsky: It is the essence, it is that which exists and does not exist, it is space. Now, for us, space is a word which has no meaning unless we limit and condition it; but in reality, space is the most abstract thing, and space containing all is just that unknown deity which is invisible and which we cannot understand, which we can but intellectually sense. What do they call it in Sanskrit, “dis,” isn’t it? The “ten divinities” that are in space. It is written “dis.”

Bulaki Rama: “Desha,” you mean, the “Ten Divinities” of space.

Blavatsky: It is just what I have been talking about. They pronounce like “sh” what we pronounce as “s,” for instance, they would say “shloka” for what we call “Sloka.”

B. Keightley: Is Fohat one of the three—Father, Mother, and Son—or what is it?

Blavatsky: Fohat is a manifestation. You mix up in the most extraordinary way the first Logos and the second Logos. The first is the unmanifested potentiality of Father, Mother and Son and of everything. It makes a triangle, that which is so dealt with by the Pythagoreans. You mix up the second Logos, which is the collectivity of the creators, or what they call in Greek Demiurgi, the builders of the universe, or simply the masons.

B. Keightley: I only want to get as clear as we can the sense in which the term is used in The Secret Doctrine.

Blavatsky: I use it in many senses in The Secret Doctrine. If

65 
you ask me such a thing I cannot remember in what sense I use it in such and such a page, but I can tell you in general what it means.

A. Keightley: Question 3. Can you give us the equivalents of these terms (Father, Mother and Son) in (a) the Vedntic, and (b) in the Sankhya phraseology?

Blavatsky: No, Sir, I do not teach you the Vedanta or the Sankhya. It will only confuse you, and make matters worse. Let us hold to the esoteric philosophy, without mixing up the Sankhya and other philosophies with it. There are many things which are identical, but now, since we learn Occultism, I do not see why I should go and speak on it. This is, I know, a knotty question. I am perfectly sure of it.

A. Keightley: Question 5. During Manvantara, when the “Son” is in existence or awake, do the Father and Mother exist independently, or only as manifested in the Son?

Blavatsky: This is a thing which tickled me very much when I read it. I cannot understand, unless you want to become polytheists and idolaters, how anyone can offer such a question as that. How can a Father and Mother be independent of the Son? Are the Father and Mother two entities of the male and female persuasions and the Son the product of these two entities? Why, it is all one, it seems to me. How can we anthropomorphize in such a way in metaphysical questions? Well, look here, I cannot tell you any better than this, that they are, if you like, centripetal and centrifugal forces. This is the Father-Mother. That which they produce is the Son. I cannot say any better, because this gives you the whole thing.

B. Keightley: And that is the point; because in our mental conceptions we had conceived of the centripetal and centrifugal forces as existing independently of the effects they produce. We regard the effects in ordinary thinking as secondary to these two forces.

Blavatsky: Well, you are very wise in the West. You are great

66 
pundits, a thousand times more so than any of these benighted pundits in the East. (I am not one of them, but I am very near to them in my heart.) But still you do not know anything about it, and you cannot bring me any of your Herbert Spencers, or your other scientists, who know anything about it. They do not understand the thing as we do; they do not understand it aright, because you think about centripetal and centrifugal forces not as to any effect they produce. Therefore you think when there are no effects they will exist the same, do you, and they will produce no effect? They will be effectless. But why should you go and conceive a thing upside down? If these centripetal and centrifugal forces exist they must be producing effects, because there is nothing aimless in nature, and if they exist they produce effects. When there are no more effects the Forces do not exist either.

Kingsland: They exist as separate entities for mathematical purposes.

Blavatsky: Oh, for mathematics, but in nature and in science it is a different thing. We divide also a man into seven principles. We do not mean that in man there are seven skins or seven entities, or seven souls or, as Gerald Massey31 thought, seven devils. They are only aspects of the one and nothing else. It certainly does not mean that. I see that you have been reading a good many books in your British Museum, but you are not accustomed to the way of expression—well, to this metaphorical form of speech of theirs. I do not know how it is, but I have been brought up from childhood in this way; and in the Georgian and Armenian times there was always this metaphorical mode of expression. In Persia they won’t say a single word.

A. Keightley: Then we pass on to Sloka 6. “The universe, the Son of Necessity, was immersed in Paranishpanna. The causes of existence had been done away with.”32 If the “causes of existence” had

67 
been done away with, how did they come into existence again? For you state in the Commentary that the chief cause of existence is the desire to exist, and it has been just stated that the Universe is the Son of Necessity.

Blavatsky: What a contradiction indeed; it is extraordinary. “The causes of existence had been done away with” refers to the past Manvantaras or age of Brahmâ, but the cause which makes the wheel of Time and Space run into eternity, which is out of time and space (now try and understand me) has nothing to do with finite cause or that which we call Nidanas. What has one thing to do with the other? That is a little bit of criticism which I could not understand. I received it very humbly with very great gratitude, but I thought to myself of the person who wrote it. I do not think he will ever be a rival to Schopenhauer, 33 or anyone like him. That was my intimate opinion. What is contradictory there.

A. Keightley: Nobody has said it is a contradiction.

Blavatsky: But read it, if you please. It is a very great contradiction. I want all of you to remark that.

A. Keightley: It is the contrast here. If the causes of existence had been done away with, how did they come into existence again? And there you answer that by saying that one Manvantara had disappeared into Pralaya and that the cause which led the previous Manvantara to exist is behind the limits of space and time, and therefore causes another Manvantara to come into being.
