
Blavatsky: Certainly, the past Manvantara. “The visible that was,” was no more, “and the invisible that is” in this is certainly that which was, and that which will be in everything.

A. Keightley: Then we get to Sloka 8. “Alone the one form of existence stretched boundless, infinite, causeless, in dreamless sleep;

76 
and life pulsated unconscious in universal Space, throughout that All-Presence which is sensed by the opened eye of the Dangma.” Does then this “eye” open upon the Absolute, or is the “one form of existence” and the “All Presence” here mentioned other than the Absolute?

Blavatsky: Well, but the eye of Dangma being open and all that—I suppose everyone ought to see that it is again a metaphorical way of expressing the thing. You may open your eyes, and anyone can open his eyes on the Absolute, but the question is, “shall we see It”? It is not said that the eye saw, it says it “sensed.” Now, if it is said that on opening the eye Dangma saw the Absolute, then it would be a fallacy and an absurdity, but it is said “sensed,” if you please.

B. Keightley: It is not taken in that sense. What was meant by the question was, is it through this open eye that we do receive such sense, or such feeling, or such consciousness, whatever you take it to be?

Blavatsky: Do you take it for your own eye?

B. Keightley: No, for the highest spiritual faculty.

Blavatsky: There was no Dangma at that time, therefore nobody could see it. What other questions have you, then?

A. Keightley: What is “dreamless sleep”?

Blavatsky: “Dreamless sleep” is a sleep without dreams, I suppose. I certainly cannot give you a better definition than that. Who can?

A. Keightley: What does it mean?

Blavatsky: A dreamless sleep means a sleep without dreams.

B. Keightley: But that simply describes its state in relation to waking consciousness.

Blavatsky: In what particular is it? What is it about the

77 
dreamless sleep? I would like to know to what page it refers, what I have been talking about.

B. Keightley: It is part of that Sloka.

Blavatsky: I remember very well. I use the expression, only I don’t see what there is. It means that there can be no presentation of the objects you can see in the universe, and therefore it is a “dreamless sleep.”

B. Keightley: What you say here is this (reads passage from The Secret Doctrine, I:47).

Blavatsky: I think that I have explained it, and what can I explain more?

Kingsland: It implies there is something very active going on in that state of dreams. I think what you want to know is, what is that which is active going on?

B. Keightley: A greater degree of activity.

Kingsland: What they want to get at is, what is that activity?

Blavatsky: I surely cannot give you what is the activity of the causeless cause. I can tell you what is the activity in man. Therefore I am obliged to say I did not graduate as high as that. Man is a microcosm of the macrocosm. It means all the spiritual faculties behind matter. Matter being asleep and resting, we are more active than ever, though we cannot see with our spiritual eyes. But this belongs to the question of dreams, it does not belong at all to this series of questions.

B. Keightley: It is deeper than a state of dreams; it is further back still.

Blavatsky: There are no dreams on the physical plane. I said to you here that it is when we do not dream about anything that we dream the most. Not only that, but we act the most, and we live on an entirely different plane from this one, and our life is a thousand

78 
times more active. Our existence, rather, is a thousand times more varied; and it would be a nice thing if we could bring it back.

Kingsland: How do we act?

Blavatsky: We cannot take it, certainly, as we act on a physical plane, since that plane we are then on is Arupa, when here we are Rupa.

Hall: Do we generate Karma in that condition?

Blavatsky: No, we do not. A man generates Karma every time he moves, with the exception {of} the activity of his highest faculties.

Hall: Therefore it is the higher faculties which operate.

Blavatsky: And therefore you come to the dreams again. If you dream, for instance, you slew somebody, and you slew him asleep, that even affects your idea, and you dream you are killing a man. Do you know, it may so happen that you will really kill a man, and the man will die, if you see it in the dream. Don’t try it, because you may do a nice little bit of black magic if it succeeded. If you had success, it might kill the man.

Kingsland: Now we are speaking about dreams that come back to consciousness?

Blavatsky: No, you can begin in consciousness and end unconsciously. The more it goes into the regions of the spiritual, the more it will be potent, and the easier you will kill the man.

B. Keightley: And the less you will remember about it.

Kingsland: Do you mean to say you can dream you have murdered a man, and not remember it at all, and that dream would be a potential force which might make you murder the man?

Blavatsky: It is your desire in the dream to hurt somebody. If you are neither an adept nor a black magician nor anything of the

79 
kind, nor a Jadoo,34 you cannot do it while you are awake, but in the dream life you are no more impeded by the limits of matter and of your senses, and that which limits you when you are awake. Then you can produce effects just the same as a hypnotizer could kill one of his subjects. You have such a potency in you that you can kill a man at a distance, by thinking you are killing him.

Hall: But he must be asleep.

Blavatsky: Not a bit of it. You must be asleep, not he.

Kingsland: Then the question is whether those actions produce Karma.

Blavatsky: That is what I say. On the lower plane, they will produce Karma; but if you are in your higher spiritual senses, you won’t kill a man at all. There you have not got those passions, and where you have not got them, by wanting to kill a man in the high spiritual regions you would kill yourself—because you are not separate from any man in creation, as your mind is not separate from the ALL.

Kingsland: In these dreamless sleeps it is only the higher principles which are active.

Blavatsky: We are talking about what Hall asked about, potentiality.

Kingsland: In every case we were referring to dreamless sleep.

Blavatsky: Dreamless sleep you may not remember, but from the next lower state you may remember, and do a good deal of mischief.

A. Keightley: Then, question 10. What portion of the mind and what principles are active during dreamless sleep?

Blavatsky: Now, please, leave this. This will make us go on till twelve o’clock, wool gathering. It belongs, my dear fellow, to

80 
these other things. We discussed dreams for four or five evenings, you know.

A. Keightley: We have no record of it.

Blavatsky: I have a record, excuse me. I can repeat it to you. I will take the same things and answer you.

A. Keightley: Then that closes these questions.

Colonel Chowne: There is one thing you talked about: you said there was no other way of expressing how light came except by a cause, and that cause was darkness.

Blavatsky: Darkness so far that we don’t know anything about it, and it is perfect darkness for us; we cannot discern anything behind that, it is impossible.

Colonel Chowne: But how does the light come?

Blavatsky: In consequence of an immutable law which manifests itself periodically. Just as I say the clock strikes and shows the hours without being conscious of it at all. Now, the clock is an automatic thing, and the other is a thing which has absolute consciousness. Therefore, to us it is no better than clockwork, because we cannot see how the intellect works.

A. Keightley: Then darkness and light in that Stanza are not used as pairs of opposites.

Blavatsky: No, no; I use darkness because there is no other word suitable. If you say chaos and take that, immediately you create all kinds of confusion. Immediately you will have thoughts of chaotic matter and all kinds of anomalies. Therefore, I use the word darkness, which is a great deal better.

Colonel Chowne: The light that you refer to is not the physical light that we think of?

Blavatsky: Oh, no! The light means, well, the first potentiality

81 
of all—the first flutter in undifferentiated matter which throws it into objectivity and into a plane which is nearer to manifestation than the other. That is the first light. Light is figuratively used.

A. Keightley: But then, also later in The Secret Doctrine, in the more scientific part, you state that light is only made visible by darkness, or rather darkness is the original thing and light is the result of the presence of objects in the objective world.

Blavatsky: If there is no sun, there would be no light, certainly, in the objective world.

A. Keightley: But I mean if there were no objects, there would be nothing to reflect the light.

Blavatsky: Take two rays of light, and they will produce darkness.

A. Keightley: Take a globe of water and pass an electric beam through it. The electric beam is perfectly dark, unless there are objects in the water, in which case you get specks of light.

Blavatsky: Yes, that is a good illustration.

B. Keightley: You cannot see the light, it passes through the water perfectly invisible.

Kingsland: You cannot see light itself. But light may be manifested to another sense, as something quite different, may it not?

B. Keightley:Yes, because, after all, the light is only differentiation of vibration.

Blavatsky: You can have the sense of light in the taste or hearing; in all your senses you can have it, or you can, for instance, in the hearing have the sense of taste and have the sense of seeing; why, look at the clairvoyants, they are perfectly asleep. They are in a trance, moreover, and they {you} come and put a letter {upon them} and the clairvoyant reads {it}. How is that?

82 
A. Keightley: That is an extra sense.