
Gardner: Sometimes it works through the forehead.

B. Keightley: Generally the pit of the stomach or the back of the head.

Blavatsky: They never tried it here, at the back of the head (pointing).

A Lady: They tried it through the feet.

B. Keightley: I never heard of seeing through the feet, though certainly the sense of sight is one they have experimented with the most.

Colonel Chowne: You mean a blind man is supposed to read colours. I do not see how he distinguishes red from blue.

Blavatsky: The colours, you see, he can know. For instance, a deaf man can be looking at the sounds; he can see because it gives him a kind of sound. Of course he does not hear it as a sound, but it

90 
is transferred to his mind as a something that is sound, really. Though it cannot be expressed. You could not understand it, of course.

Hall: Deaf and dumb people very often like to put their hands on a piano while it being played, so that the vibration may be communicated to their brains.

B. Keightley: Then there is the well-known case of a blind man, who always associated sounds with colours. He had a conception, red, which he associated with brass instruments, the trumpet particularly. Red always suggested to his mind the trumpet.

Blavatsky: It is extremely interesting, this association of sounds and colours by vibration, and then it is a very scientific thing, as I think somebody speaks about it. Now, for instance, the sounds have got so many modulations and vibrations. And light is just the same way.

Dr. Williams: Sound begins at fifteen vibrations a second and runs through a very limited scale, so far as the ear is capable of conceiving it. The vibrations increase in intensity, and then comes the sense of heat. The different senses seem to take up one scale of vibration, of which all these different manifestations consist. You go on with the sense of heat until you get a dull redness, and there you get light, and so you run through the whole gamut. It passes out of light, then call it the chemical rays that passes beyond colour and produces chemical changes.

Blavatsky: Isn’t there a difference in the prismatic colours? They are 7, and then there is something, I forget how they call it, a measurement.

B. Keightley: A wavelength.

Blavatsky: I don’t know how they call it. There are only five of them seen, or three. Is it an instrument that was invented, that these seven colours reduce themselves to five, then to three and then one?

91 
B. Keightley: No, there are three primary colours. These other seven are formed from combinations of those. First you get five—

Blavatsky: No, I speak about some instrument.

Kingsland: Perhaps the spectroscope.

Blavatsky: No, not that. I read that they had invented an instrument which could give not only the radiation of colours but the reduction of colours, and that seven colours passed through some 77 shades until merged into one white, you know.

Hall: Is that the helioscope?40

Kingsland: It is only a matter of combining again after they are once dispersed by means of the prism.

Blavatsky: Oh, but it is the seven colours, where in their, so to say, gradation or shading, instead of being seven they become perhaps 77 times seven?

Dr. Williams: I think it was some adaptation for showing the ratio, rather, of wavelength and colour to rate vibration. That would be an almost indefinite number of vibrations, of course.

Blavatsky: But they must be counted. I speak about that because it will always come back to the 3 and the 4 and the 7.

Hall: Some people associate the different kinds of colour with different kinds of pain.

Blavatsky: It is very easy. When you have neuralgia, there must be some colour you cannot look at without terrible pain.

Dr. Williams: Insane persons are treated sometimes by means of colour.

Blavatsky: Now did you ever think why bulls are irritated at the red colour? Do you know it gives them terrible pain? It enters

92 
somehow or other through their sight into the brain, and makes them perfectly crazy. It gives them physical pain.

Gardner: Is that why they wear red coats in hunting?

Kingsland: They don’t hunt bulls!

Gardner: Oh! I thought you said “wolves.”

Blavatsky: Some colours do give pain. There are some sensitive persons who cannot look at very bright colours, they feel positively nervous at some combinations of colours, they cannot bear it.

Dr. Williams: I think it is the most interesting question of science.

Blavatsky: But I think the far more interesting question is to see the result of various combinations in the occult spheres. Now you will see one result on the terrestrial plane; but if you were to follow it up and see what are the results produced in the invisible sphere, well, it is invisible but still, some of the effects will become objective. Though the causes which are set in motion will be invisible, you will see the effects.

Dr. Williams: It is always far more interesting to investigate any question from the point of view of principles before descending into particulars.

Blavatsky: I believe the only exact science that you have is mathematics, and mathematics proceeds in this way.

Dr. Williams: Yes, from first principles to details.

Blavatsky: Certainly, it is not quite the Aristotelian way that you can use in mathematics.

Dr. Williams: I do not think science would object to this more than this: “Be sure of your first principles. If you know what they are, then there would be no difficulty.”

Blavatsky: But how about they who don’t know what they see before their noses? They only see that which they think they see,

93 
and then they are obliged to give them up, because they see they are mistaken. Why are the men of science so very, very conceited?

Dr. Williams: Well, I think it all grows out of the idea that man in a certain way creates everything from himself, that he has no relation to any higher power than himself, and he regards himself as the highest power in the universe.

Blavatsky: Is it conceit?

Dr. Williams: I should say almost supreme conceit.

Blavatsky: How about our grandfathers? For the scientists want us to have a grandfather common with the ape; that is supreme degradation.

B. Keightley: No, they may think this: “Look how gloriously we have progressed in a few thousand years.”

Hall: Like a self-made man who is always referring to the time when he came to London with twopence in his pocket.

Blavatsky: How do you know there are not self-made apes in the forest? We do not know anything about it. I have seen apes who are very wise. I have seen many; I love apes. I have a great tenderness for them, and I think they are better than men are. It is a fact.

(The proceedings then came to a close.)