
A. Keightley: The first question is in connection with [loka 6, Stanza 1 (reads passage from The Secret Doctrine). Now, with reference to the “Seven Lords,” question 1 runs: “Since confusion is apt to arise in the correct application of the terms, will you please distinguish between Dhyan-Chohans, Planetary Spirits, Builders and Dhyani-Buddhas?”

Blavatsky: Yes; but you know, really, it will take a volume if you want to know all the hierarchies and every distinct class of angels among the Dhyan-Chohans, the Planetary Spirits, the Dhyani- Buddhas, the Builders, etc. Now, Dhyan-Chohan is a generic name for all Devas, or celestial beings. They are one and all called Dhyan- Chohans. Now, a Planetary Spirit is the ruler of a planet, a kind of personal God, but finite; that is the difference you see. A Planetary Spirit is the one that has to rule and watch over each globe of a chain, or every planet, and there is some difference between those who are over the great sacred planets, and those over small chains like ours, because the earth has never been one of the sacred planets—never. It was simply taken as a substitute, like the moon and the sun, because the sun is the central star, and the moon has never been a {sacred} planet. It is dead long ago.

A. Keightley: But does the earth belong to a chain which belongs to the train of one of the sacred planets?

Blavatsky: Oh no, not at all. The earth has its own chain. Then there are six companions which are not seen, which are on three different planes.

96 
Kingsland: Are none of those other six, one of the sacred planets?

Blavatsky: No, sir, not one, and it is not feasible.

Kingsland: Then how are we to distinguish between them?

Blavatsky: The seven sacred planets of antiquity were the planets which astrologers take now, minus the sun and the moon, which are substitutes.

The Chairman {T.H. Harbottle}: And plus two that we do not know.

Blavatsky: Yes, of which one is an intra-Mercurial planet, which they are trying to find and cannot. They wanted to call it Vulcan, or to give it a name before it was found out; they think they have found it, but they are not sure. Some say there are several, others one, but they do not know. When they find out they will know that it is one of the secret {sacred?} planets, and the other one is what I cannot explain. It was as the substitute of this planet that the moon was taken, and it was seen at a certain hour of the night just as though it was near the moon, but it was not; it is this planet which was not known at all. I think sometimes they do not give the name, but as to my astronomical ideas, I would not trust them.

The Chairman: It is not Herschel,41 is it?

Blavatsky: I thought it was at one time, and yesterday evening I was thinking a good deal about it, but I am not sure. If I were to see, or if it were possible to have a planisphere42 of the heavens to see at certain hours of the night, as astronomers must have it, I would have recognized it; but if it is not Herschel, I could not tell you.

The Chairman: But the modern astronomers say about Herschel that it is a planet which has an almost unexpected and what we should call an occult influence upon things; and they, having recently

97 
discovered Herschel, assign exactly the sort of attributes to Herschel in astrology that one should expect of the secret planet.

Blavatsky: That is why I thought it was so, but I am not sure, and I cannot tell you until I have seen the planispheres, but as far as the name is concerned, you cannot go by the Sanskrit in order to know what is the name. I do not know well enough beyond this, that it is an occult planet, which is seen at a certain hour of the night, directly, as though near the moon.

Kingsland: Every night?

Blavatsky: I am not sure whether it is every night. I know it was so, and that it had a sacred day, also.

Gardner: It moves very slowly.

Blavatsky: And, mind you, the motion is retrograde. Therefore I do believe it is Herschel; but I would not swear to it.

B. Keightley: If you do away with the moon as one of the astrological planets, you would have to attach to one of the others the influence which is at present ascribed to the moon, and the question is, whether that can be done.

Blavatsky: What is said is this, that the influence of this secret planet passes through the moon, i.e., the occult influence of this secret planet; but whether it passes so that it comes in a direct line, or how, I cannot explain. That is for you mathematicians to know better than I can.

The Chairman: Then, if that were so, you would find the influence of Herschel would be very strong indeed when it was in conjunction with the moon, as the astrologers call it.

Kingsland: Are these seven planets all on the same plane as ourselves?

Blavatsky: Certainly.

98 
Kingsland: Then I presume there is a separate plane belonging to each of those.

Blavatsky: Yes, you find it in The Secret Doctrine.

A. Keightley: Are there minor chains belonging to these sacred planets? You say the earth has never been one of the sacred planets, and it has a chain.

Blavatsky: It has a chain and many others have chains, which have not been discovered, but will be discovered just as much as the earth’s. That is one of the smallest planets, as you know yourselves.

Kingsland: What makes the others sacred or secret?

Blavatsky: I suppose because they have occult influences.

The Chairman: But then the seven are on a different hierarchy, as it were, to the planetary spirit of the earth?

Blavatsky: Oh, yes. The planetary spirit of the earth is what they call the terrestrial spirit and is not very high. The planetary spirit has nothing to do with the spiritual man. It has to do with the things of matter with the cosmic beings—they are cosmic rulers, so to say, and they form into shape and fashion things. They have everything to do with matter, but not with spirit. With spirit it is the Dhyani-Buddhas who have to do. It is another hierarchy that has to do with that, and I am explaining it to you here.

The Chairman: These seven planetary spirits, as we should use the phrase, have really nothing to do with the earth, except incidentally.

Blavatsky: They have everything to do with the earth, materially.

Kingsland: They have to do, in fact, with man in his higher part.

Blavatsky: They have nothing whatever to do with the spiritual man.

99 
Kingsland: Have they anything to do with the fifth principle?

Blavatsky: They have something to do with the fourth principle but with the three higher principles they have nothing to do whatever. I have not finished yet. You asked me what were the things, and I tell you. First, Dhyan-Chohans was a generic name for all the celestial beings. Second, the Builders are a class called by the ancients Cosmocratores, the builders. They are builders simply, like the celestial masons who shape under the orders of the architect, so to speak. They are but the masons to the grand architect of the universe.

Kingsland: Are they not the planetary spirits, then?

Blavatsky: What, the Builders? Well, they are, but of a lower kind.

A. Keightley: Do they act under the planetary spirit of the earth?

Blavatsky: Well, no. The planetary spirit of the earth is not a bit higher, unless he is one who has attained his rank, so to say, earlier than the others, and therefore he is considered the chief of them. Mind you, I tell you that which is said not in the exoteric religions (though in some, of course, you may learn it), but in the esoteric teaching.

The Chairman: But are not the Builders of various classes when considering the solar system or the universe as a whole or any one particular planet? I mean, are there not Builders absolutely terrestrial, in the same way that there are builders of the solar system and the universe?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly.

Kingsland: Then the terrestrial Builder is a planetary spirit?

Blavatsky: Yes, but a very low kind. What is our earth compared to Jupiter, for instance (well, we won’t speak of the solar angels)? It is nothing but a speck of dirt or mud.

100 
The Chairman: But it has its hierarchy.

Blavatsky: Of course it has, all of them have. This will be shown to you here. They are reflected in the intelligence of the G.A.O.T.U.,43 which is simply Mahat, the Universal Mind. There comes again the third. Well it is said distinctly, the planetary spirits are those who watch over planets and globes of a chain such as that of our earth. Now, fourth, you spoke about Dhyani-Buddhas. They are the same as the higher Devas. In India they are what are called Bodhisattvas in the Buddhist religion, but exoterically they are given only as five whereas there are seven. Why they do so is because exoterically they take it “à la lettre,” but they represent the Seven, and it is also said in The Secret Doctrine, “the five Buddhas who have come, and two who are to come in the Sixth and Seventh Races.” Now, esoterically, their president is {Vairocana?},44 and he is called the Supreme Intelligence, and the Supreme Buddha, and [  ]45 which is again higher than the [  ], because he is as much above [  ] as Parabrahm is above Brahmâ or Mahat. It is the same difference. Or as, for instance, the Dhyani-Buddha is higher than the Manushi Buddha, the Human Buddha—which is the same difference. The Dhyani-Buddhas are one thing exoterically and another thing in occultism. Exoterically, each is a Trinity. (continues reading from her own notes.) That is the difference between Dhyani-Buddhas and the others. The Dhyani-Buddhas are those who remain from a previous Manvantara on a planet which is not as high as ours, which is very low; and the others have to pass through all kingdoms of Nature, through the mineral kingdom, the vegetable kingdom, and the animal kingdom.

Kingsland: Then the Dhyan-Chohan is prehuman, and the Dhyani-Buddha is posthuman.

Blavatsky: They are all Dhyan-Chohans.

101 
A. Keightley: Well, the planetary spirit.

Blavatsky: That is a creature in this period.

A. Keightley: Prehuman?

Blavatsky: How do you mean prehuman?

A. Keightley: Will be a human.

Kingsland: Dhyani-Buddhas have been men.

Blavatsky: And the Dhyani Buddhas were before, and they will not be men on this, but they will be something higher than men, because at the end of the Seventh Race it is said they will come and incarnate on earth.

Kingsland: Will they be what corresponds to man on a higher plane?

Blavatsky: I don’t know, but they will come in the Seventh Round, because all humanity will then become Buddhas, or Devas. They are the emanations or the reflections of the Manushi Buddha, the Human Buddhas. Not necessarily Gautama Buddha, for he is a Manushi Buddha, a human Buddha, a saint—whatever you like to call it.

A. Keightley: Question 2. “Does the planetary spirit in charge of a Globe go into Pralaya when his Globe enters Pralaya?”

Blavatsky: The planetary spirits go into Pralaya at the end of the Seventh Round, not after every one of the rounds, because he is in charge of the Globe, and has to watch the workings of the laws even during the statu quo condition of the Globe when it goes into its time of rest, that is to say, during its inter-planetary Pralaya. I explain everything in The Secret Doctrine, and this is explained somewhere there.

The Chairman: I don’t remember it.

B. Keightley: I don’t think you put it in print.

102 
Blavatsky: Maybe. Then they must have left it out. Or perhaps it is the third or fourth volume. I remember I have written it. There is the third volume; it is full of the Buddhas, Devas, and things.

A. Keightley: Well then, if anything is missed out of The Secret Doctrine, we will say it is in the third volume.

Blavatsky: No, really, I could show it to you, it is in the third volume. I know I have written it.

A. Keightley: Then Question 3. “Does the Dhyani, whose province it is to watch over a Round, watch over, during his period of activity, the whole series of Globes, or only over a particular Globe?”

Blavatsky: I have explained this just now. Each of them has his own Globe to watch, but there are seven planetary spirits, and it is Dhyani-Buddha. You make a mistake there.

A. Keightley: I said Dhyani.

Blavatsky: Here it is said when the All and planetary, and the Dhyani-Buddhas and all who will appear on earth in the Seventh Round when all humanity will have become Buddhas {and} Devas, their sons, and they will be no more trammeled with matter, there is a difference between planetary and the other (continues reading from her own notes). Mind you, in the Kabalah you will see always mention of the three higher planes, of which they speak with great reluctance. Even there they will not go as far as that, they simply give you the Triad: Chochmah (or whatever they call it) and Binah, the male and female intelligence, or wisdom and intelligence. And this Binah in the Kabalah is called the Jehovah, and a female, if you please.

Kingsland: It says here that the Dhyani is to watch successively every one of the rounds. A little confusion arose there.
