
Blavatsky: But Dhyani is a generic name, as I said to you. It is an abbreviation of Dhyani-Chohans, that is all, but not of Dhyani-

103 
Buddhas. Dhyani-Buddhas are quite a different thing. If I said it, it is a very great mistake, a lapsus linguae to which I plead guilty very often—as I have just said 28 was 5 times 7.

A. Keightley: Question 4. Is there any name which can be applied to the “Planetary Spirit,” which watches over the entire evolution of a planetary chain?

Blavatsky: Which one is it?

A. Keightley: Number 4.

Blavatsky: I had two or three pages written out, but perhaps it is better that I should not read it. There is nothing at all, it simply explains why we do not worship them.

The Chairman: Well, let us have it; it is a very interesting point, that.

Blavatsky: This is why we go against the idea of any personal extra-cosmic god. You cannot worship one such god, for “the gods are many,” is said in the Bible. Therefore you have to choose either to worship many, who are all one as good, and as limited, as the other, which is polytheism and idolatry; or do as the Israelites have done——choose your one tribal god. (continues reading from notebook.) Now this, in the Bible, is what is said: “The gods are many, but the God is one.”46 Why? Because it is their own god that they have chosen. With the end of Pralaya he disappears, as Brahmâ does, and as all other Devas do. That is to say, he is merged in the Absolute, because he is simply one of the rays, which, whether the highest or the lowest, will all be merged into the Absolute, and therefore we do not worship and we do not offer prayers to them, because if we did we should have to worship many gods; and if we address our prayers to the one Absolute, then I do not think the one Absolute has got ears to hear us. That is my opinion. It may be atheistical and I may appear a very great infidel, but I cannot help it.

104 
Mrs. Williams: What objection would there be to worshipping many gods?

Blavatsky: I do not see any objection, but it would be a tiresome thing. You would not have time to pay them all compliments. It would be rather a monotonous thing.

Mrs. Williams: You spoke of it as being idolatrous. I wanted to find out whether in your mind it was so.

Blavatsky: Not at all. I say if we have to offer prayers to some personal god, then we must believe in many gods, and we must offer prayers to many or to none, because why should we have a preference? We do not know whether it is the best or the worst we may fall upon. It may be one who is not at all very perfect.

B. Keightley: Besides, we should make the others jealous.

Blavatsky: Besides, we have a god within us, every one of us. This is a direct ray from the Absolute; every one of us is the “celestial ray from the one—”, well, I do not find any other word but the Absolute and the Infinite. Now then, number 4.

A. Keightley: Is there any name which can be applied to the Planetary Spirit, which watches over the entire evolution of a Planetary Chain?

Blavatsky: No name, unless you make of it the generic name since he is not alone but seven. (Continues reading from her notebook.) If you give him this name it will be a very good name, I think. It will be scientific and it will answer the purpose, but you are at liberty to give any name you like. What is in a name? “Choose you the daily gods you duly worship,” says Joshua.7

A. Keightley: Is there any name applied to it in the Sanskrit?

Blavatsky: Look here, the Vaishnavas worship Vishnu, the Saivas worship Shiva, the other—how do you call them?—the [  ]

7 This is a paraphrase of Joshua 24:15.

105 
worship Krishna, and so on. Everyone has a god of his own. Everyone chooses his own tribal god, or anything they like, or their racial god, and they are happy.

The Chairman: But such a god as Vishnu is the synthesis of the seven.

Blavatsky: One is the creator, so called, though he certainly did not create matter out of nothing, but the universe out of something. The other is a preserver and the third is a destroyer; but being that, he is the highest, because that which destroys, regenerates, and because you cannot have a plant growing without killing the seed. Therefore, he destroys to give a higher form, you understand.

A. Keightley: Then these three questions: the name of the “Planetary Spirit,” and “Is there a name which can be applied to the Planetary Spirit watching over a Round?” Also, “Is Brahmâ the correct term to use concerning the Planetary Spirit of one Globe during one Round, or would Manu be the more correct term?” In this sense is Manu identical with Brahmâ?

Blavatsky: You have jumped to number 6.

A. Keightley: I put those three together, because they really practically come together. We wanted to distinguish a Planetary Spirit in a Chain of Worlds from the Planetary Spirit over one Globe, which really rules one Globe, and thirdly to ask whether Brahmâ is the correct term to use.

Blavatsky: Of the universe they would never say Brahmâ. They would say Manus, and they are the same as Brahmâ; and then the rest of them, sometimes they are reckoned the seven, sometimes ten, according to what they are talking about, and this is in the esoteric meaning in the Puranas.

A. Keightley: There is a special class of Planetary Spirits which deal with a Chain.

Blavatsky: There are Rishis, and the Manus are those who are

106 
over every Round.

A. Keightley: Then are the Manus and the Rishis the same?

Blavatsky: They are just the same—Rishi or Manu. What is Manu? Manu comes from Man, to think—the thinking intelligence. Now just the same as this [  ], which is the intelligence, or this [  ] is considered the supreme intelligence, and he and Brahmâ are one. Take the Vishnu Purana; take any Purana which will give you exoterically these things. They give the real thing, and they invent many things just as blinds. But you will find a good many things which you will never find in the other scriptures. They will come and ornament things, and yet the fundamental truths are there.

A. Keightley: I want to avoid, if possible, all these blinds with regard to these names.

Blavatsky: The Brahmins will pitch into us after that. Why shall I give them names? Am I a Roman Catholic priest, to come and baptize them, and give them all different names? For me they are ideations. I am not going to give them names. If I told you the real occult names, it would not make you any the wiser. You are sure to forget them the first moment.

The Chairman: But it helps us to place them.

Blavatsky: Then let us take the Prismatic Idea: let us call them the Red God and the Orange God and the Yellow God and the Blue and the Green.

The Chairman: Very well, but in regard, for instance, to that seven in one, what relation do they bear to the Sephiroth?

Blavatsky: They are three and seven. They are ten in all, but the higher is considered the greatest, and the seven, the god descending into matter.

The Chairman: What relation is there between that seven and the seven we were speaking of?

107 
Blavatsky: The Planetary Spirits? None.

The Chairman: Are they the Planetary Spirits?

Blavatsky: Well, I would not call them that. You never find a single name which is not Angelic. Take the Kabalah. They call it the third Sephiroth, as being intelligence; his angelic name is {Zaphiel?}, and he is called Jehovah, and this, that and the other, and the book goes on and gives the thing. How it is called, you cannot understand it. But, you see, all of them start from one point, and make a kind of broken ray, coming from one focus. Shall we then in this way give names to all of them?

The Chairman: No, but I think we might understand what they are, and what relation they bear to names which we do know at present. The Sephiroth is a name which is particularly familiar, and if one can have an idea that they are in the seventh Sephiroth, we might know.

Blavatsky: They are just the Cosmocratores on a higher plane, but yet the last hierarchy, Malkuth coming to earth, and this is the perfect hierarchy.

The Chairman: Then the sevenfold or prismatic gods which preside over the Planetary Chains will be something lower.

Blavatsky: Certainly they will; because they are not the Watchers, you know.

The Chairman: I have got what I wanted.

Blavatsky: If you tell me what you want, I will say, but why are you so inquisitive, tell me?

The Chairman: Only because I think one looks for these analogies all through, and when the analogies do not seem to fit, you are puzzled. The only way to attempt to understand them is to see one analogy running through them.

Blavatsky: Do you want to compare them with the Kabalah?

108 
The Chairman: Yes, but not in detail, because I do not know enough about its details. One wants to know the relation, as it were, of the Planetary Chain to the Cosmos, and secondly, of the spirits ruling the Planetary Chains to the spirits of the Cosmos, and so on.

Blavatsky: It is the [  ] in its collectivity, and this includes the seven lower Sephiroth. And it becomes another thing, for it becomes the bridegroom of the bride, Malkuth.

A. Keightley: Then we pass on to the Stanza following: “But where was the Dangma when the Alaya of the Universe (Soul as the basis of all, Anima Mundi) was in Paramartha (Absolute Being and Consciousness which are Absolute Non-being and Unconsiousness) and the Great Wheel was Anupadaka?”47 Does Alaya mean that which is never dissolved, being derived from “a” and “Laya”?

Blavatsky: [Well, in this book they are very rough. I have just strung them together. They are simply notes.] Alaya is the living sentient or active Soul of the World (Continues reading from her notes.) Now, the Alaya {Laya} means the negation or Layam, as they call it, because it is that which is perfect non-differentiation. It is perfectly homogeneous and it is negative, inactive, and has no attributes, and Alaya is the Soul of the Universe.

A. Keightley: Then practically this Stanza means “Where was the Dangma, when the Alaya of this universe was in Laya.”

Blavatsky: There is Bulaki Rama, who will give you the true explanation. Because I give you the Hindu things simply on analogy. I do not profess to teach it. What I give is occultism and the occult doctrine and I try to make, for example, to the Hindus and those who have read Hindu books, the thing more clear. I just give you the analogy, but there is a Sanskrit scholar. How would you explain it?

Bulaki Rama: Laya means that which is absolutely nothing, from the root (la?) {li}, to disappear, and Alaya means not alive.

109 
Blavatsky: Just what I give you here. One is manifested and fully active and the other has disappeared from the realm of manifestation and fallen into Non-Being. So, then, I have given them correctly.

A. Keightley: Then it is different exactly from what we put down in the question as being, e.g., never dissolved.

Blavatsky: Certainly not, because it is non-differentiation. Alaya means latent. At the end of Manvantara, when Pralaya sets in, certainly the Alaya will become Laya and fall into nothing. There will be the one Great Breath only. It is most assuredly dissolved. It is eternally, throughout the Manvantaras, but the Laya is nothing, it is the thing which is a negation of all. Just the same as the Absolute, the Parabrahm; it is and it is not.

B. Keightley: Alaya is simply two negatives put together to make a positive. You can get at it in that way.

Bulaki Rama: Laya means to disappear forever, and therefore it is not negative.

Blavatsky: That is to say, it is nothing; it is just like Ain-Soph. What is Ain-Soph? No-thing. It is not a thing; that is to say, it is nothing, the zero point.

The Chairman: It is neither negative nor positive.

Blavatsky: Hence Alaya is the one active life in Jivatma, while Laya is the life, latent. One is absolute life and Be-ness, and the other is absolute non-life and non-Be-ness. So you see it is perfectly the opposite.

A. Keightley: Then the next question is asked in these words, “Page 50, Alaya is the one life, the one life is Jivatma. Are then Alaya and Jivatma identical?”

Blavatsky: I should say that they were. I do not see any difference. Anima Mundi—that is Jivatma, the Soul of the World,

110 
the living soul. Jiva is life. For the matter of that, every life has got its Jiva, but this is the Jivatma, the one Universal Soul. I think so, at least. May be you will tell me otherwise, but it seems to me that Alaya and Jivatma are one.

Bulaki Rama: Certainly.

Blavatsky: How would you translate “Atma”?

Bulaki Rama: Well, it means that which is present.

A. Keightley: What is the difference between Atma and Jiva?