5.
The Theosophical Society.
Meeting held at Blavatsky Lodge
on February 7, 1889.
A. Keightley: Sloka 3, Stanza 2. “The hour had not yet struck; the ray had not yet flashed into the Germ; the Matri-Padma had not yet swollen.” “The ray of the ‘Ever-Darkness’ becomes, as it is emitted, a ray of effulgent life or light, and flashes into the ‘Germ’—the point in the Mundane Egg, represented by matter in its abstract sense.” {Question} 1. Is the point in the Mundane Egg the same as the point in the circle—the unmanifested Logos?

Blavatsky: Never; the point in the circle is that which we call the unmanifested Logos. The manifested Logos is the triangle, and I have said it many times. Does not Pythagoras speak of the never manifested Monad which lives in solitude and darkness, which, when the hour strikes, radiates from itself number 1? This number 1, descending, produces number 2, and number 2, number 3, the three forming a triangle, the first full geometrical figure in the world of forms. It is this triangle which is the point in the Mundane Egg, and which, after gestating, starts from the egg and forms a triangle and not the point in the circle, for the point in the circle is the unmanifested Logos.

A. Keightley: That is what I thought.

Blavatsky: Brahmâ-Vâch-Vîraj in the Hindu philosophy, and it is Kether, Chochmah and Binah in the Sephirothal tree. The one Logos is the potential, the unrevealed cause; the other the actus, or in other words, the Monad evolving, from its invisible self, the active effect which in its turn becomes a cause on a lower plane. Now discuss the matter. Who has any objections? Collect your

130 
combativeness and go on, gentlemen. Has no one any objections to offer? Do ask, President.

The President: Well, in a sense, the second question bears upon it, because it illustrates, or at least it will settle the question, as to the exact plane of differentiation with which the whole of this Sloka is dealing as I take it. Ask the second question.

A. Keightley: 2. “What is the Ever-Darkness, in the sense used here?”

Blavatsky: Ever-Darkness means the ever-unknowable mystery, behind the veil even of the Logos.

A. Keightley: Parabrahm, in fact.

Blavatsky: Parabrahm; even the Logos can see only Mklaprakriti. It cannot see that which is beyond the veil; that is the “Ever-Unknowable Darkness.”

A. Keightley: What is the ray, then, in this connection?

Blavatsky: The plane of the circle whose face is blank {black} and whose point in the circle is white; but white figuratively, because certainly it has no colour. The first possible conception in our minds of the invisible Logos. Ever-Darkness is eternal and the ray is periodically flashed out of its central point through the germ. The ray is withdrawn back into the central point and the Germ grows into the second Logos, the triangle within the Mundane Egg. If you don’t understand still, you just offer me any questions, and I will try to answer them.

The President: The difficulty we were all in when we were reading this Sloka the other day and considering it was, that we were doubtful whether it really referred to the same epoch of manifestation as the earlier portion, as the first Stanza, for instance.

Blavatsky: There is the beauty of these Stanzas, and I will tell you afterwards, later in the questions.

131
The President: I may say, I think most of these questions are intended to bring out this point, that is to say, whereabouts we are.

B. Keightley: Because the Mundane Egg seems to be really the third stage, at any rate not earlier than the third.

Blavatsky: The first stage is when the point appears within the dark circle, within that unknowable darkness.

The President: May I interrupt you for one moment—that point being the unmanifested Logos?

Blavatsky: Yes. The second stage is when, from that white point, proceeds the ray which darts and produces the first point, which in the Zohar is called Kether or Sephira, then produces Chochmah and Binah, the first triangle, which is the manifested Logos. And yet, from this manifested Logos will go the seven rays, which in the Zohar are called the lower Sephiroth, and which in our system are called, well, the Primordial Seven, from which there will proceed innumerable series of hierarchies. They simplify the thing and take simply the four planes and the worlds and so on. That is all. This does not explain anything.

Kingsland: What you say is that the triangle is what you here refer to as the Germ in the Mundane Egg?

Blavatsky: Yes.

B. Keightley: The Mundane Egg being used in a very much wider sense than that of terrestrial—being the Universal Egg, so to speak.

Blavatsky: There is the Universal Egg and the Solar Egg; they refer to it, and of course you must qualify it and say what it is.

B. Keightley: Abstract form is the same, whatever scale you take it on.

The President: Being the eternal feminine, really.

132 
Blavatsky: No, no. There is no eternal female principle, and there is no eternal male principle. There is the potentiality of both in one only, a principle which cannot be even called spirit.

The President: Put it thus, then: abstract form being the first manifestation of the female principle.

Blavatsky: The first manifestation, not of the female principle, but of the ray, that proceeds from the central point, which is perfectly sexless; this ray produces first that which is the potentiality united of both sexes, but is not yet either male or female sex. That differentiation will come later when it falls into matter, when the triangle becomes a square. The first tetraktys.

The President: Then the Mundane Egg is as sexless as the ray?

Blavatsky: It is undifferentiated primordial matter.

The President: One is in the habit of associating matter with anything to which the name of female is applied.

Blavatsky: Matter certainly is female, because it is receptive of the ray of the sun which fecundates it, and this matter produces everything that is on its face; but that is quite a different thing. This is on the lowest plane.

The President: This is substance, rather than material.

B. Keightley: And substance is of no sex.

Blavatsky: Do you know what is matter? The synonym of matter is mother, and mother comes from matter, they are interchangeable.

A. Keightley: Then what I want to understand is this: You have the ray, which ultimately starts the manifested Logos, or the Germ within the Mundane Egg. Does the Mundane Egg exist, then, in any way, excepting potentiality, before this first triangular—if you may call it so—Germ is started by this ray?

133
Blavatsky: What is the egg, the Mundane Egg, or Universal Egg, call it whatever you like, whether on the principle of universality, or on the principle of a solar system? The egg means the ever-eternal, existing, undifferentiated matter, which is not strictly matter as we ordinarily use the term, but which, as we say, is the atoms. The atoms are indestructible; and matter is destructible in form, but the atoms are absolutely indestructible.

Gardner: Do you mean to say that the atoms are not yet crystallized?

Blavatsky: I do not speak about chemical atoms. I speak about the atoms of occultism, which certainly no chemist has ever seen. They are mathematical points. If you read about the Monads of Leibniz,59 you will see what it is, this atom.

A. Keightley: Then may one say the Germ is the active point within the Alayic condition of substance?

Blavatsky: The Germ is simply a figurative way of speaking. The Germ is everywhere. Just as when one speaks of the circle whose centre and circumference is everywhere and nowhere; because, given the proposition that the circle is endless, surely it is infinite, and you cannot place the circumference anywhere, or put any centre to that which is limitless. It is simply a way of talking, just to bring to your conception something more clearly than you could otherwise imagine it. Just the same with the Germ. They call it the Germ, and the Germ is all the Germs, that is to say, the whole of Nature: the whole creative power that will emanate, that they call Brahmâ or any name you like, for on every plane it has got another name.

A. Keightley: Then you practically answer the third question. “What stage of manifestation is symbolized by the Mundane Egg?”

Blavatsky: I say the Mundane Egg is on the plane of

134 
differentiation, the first stage if you like; but from the plane of non- differentiation it is the third, as I just told you. The Egg represents the just differentiated cosmic matter in which the vital creative Germ receives its first spiritual impulse, and potentiality becomes potency. I think that is answered.

The President: Yes.

B. Keightley: That is a very good phrase, “potentiality becomes potency”; it just expresses the difference between the first and the second Stanzas.

Blavatsky: That is my difficulty, you see, I don’t know English well enough to come and explain it to you.

A. Keightley: Question 4. “Is the Matri-Padma here spoken of the eternal or the periodical Egg?”

Blavatsky: The eternal, of course; it will become periodical only when the ray from Logos number one will have flashed from the latent Germ in the Matri-Padma, which, you understand, is the Egg, the womb of the universe, as it is called. You would not call eternal the physical germ in the female, but rather the latent spirit of the Germ concealed within the male cell in Nature. In all the creations of plants or animals, it is just the same. Take it on analogy or on the method of correspondence, it is just the same.

B. Keightley: Sloka 4. “But, as the hour strikes and it becomes receptive of the Fohatic impress of Divine Thought (the Logos or the male aspect of the Anima Mundi, Alaya)—its heart opens.” Question 5: Does not “Fohatic impress of Divine Thought” apply to a later stage of differentiation, strictly speaking?

Blavatsky: Now look here, this involves a very difficult answer. I wish you would give all your attention to it. Understand once for all, for if you understand clearly this thing, it will prevent your putting many, many questions which are perfectly useless, and you will understand them better also. You see, I have explained to you as well as I can, now try and correct me, if you please, if I don’t

135
explain clearly. They want to say that Fohat is a later manifestation. Very well. I answer that Fohat is, as a full-blown force or entity, a later development. Fohatic as an adjective may be used in any sense, Fohat as a noun springs from a Fohatic attribute. Do you understand this now? No electricity will be developed or generated from something where there is no electric power. But before electricity, or a certain kind of electricity, is developed, you can speak about the electric impulse and electric impress, cannot you? I say Fohatic, because Fohatic has got a special meaning in the esoteric teaching; and I will first give you the meaning here. It comes afterwards, you know. The Divine Principle is eternal and gods are periodical.

B. Keightley: In other words, the Fohatic principle—to translate it into a different term—the Fohatic principle is eternal, but Fohat is an entity or a god.

Blavatsky: Or, as a synthesis of this force on our plane of differentiation, it is periodical and is limited, and it comes later.

The President: The Fohatic principle produces Fohat instead of arising from it.

Blavatsky: It is the Zakti or Force of the Divine. Fohat and Brahmâ are all one thing. They are various aspects of the Divine Mind.

B. Keightley: Have you written nothing more about that there?

Blavatsky: Not here. It is too easy a thing to write anything about. It comes in the next question.

A. Keightley: “In the commentary on Stanza 2, is it not your aim to convey some idea of the subject by speaking of the correspondences on a much later stage of evolution? For instance, is not ‘Fohat’ in the sense used here the synthesis of the primordial seven, and therefore appearing at a much later stage than that of the first manifestation of the Alaya?”

Blavatsky: It is so, most assuredly; but then you were told

136 
more than once that the commentaries busy themselves but with the evolution of our solar system in this book. The beauty and the wisdom of the Stanzas are in this, that they may be interpreted on seven different planes, the last reflecting in its grossly differentiated aspect, and copying on the universal law of correspondences, or analogy, all that it sees before in the beginning. Every plane is a reflection and a copy of another plane. As it took place in the definite, undifferentiated plane, so it took place on the second, on the third, on the fourth, and so on. Now these Stanzas represent all of them, and the student who understands well the gradual development, so to speak, and the progressive order of things, will understand perfectly to which it applies. If we talk about the higher divine world, we shall talk just in the same way, because in The Secret Doctrine that I give to the world and to your great critics, I certainly give it as applied to the solar system, and even this they do not understand. They call it idle talk, so why shall I go and bother my brains to go into something more on the higher plane? This is not for the profane, let us make a difference, we must draw a line of demarcation somewhere.

Forsyth: Then are we to understand, Madame, that the whole of the writing in The Secret Doctrine has reference only to the solar system, as we understand the solar system?

Blavatsky: It has reference to that chiefly. The second volume is simply the development of life on our earth, not even in the solar system, for the thing is so tremendous that it would require 100 volumes to write all this. Sometimes I make remarks about larger questions, but as a whole the exposition begins and ends on this earth and with the development of life from the first day of Manvantara. You see how they are confused even on this terrestrial plane; so what would it be if I mixed up the evolution of life on Neptune, or beyond the solar system? Why, they would not understand a word. The esoteric doctrine teaches all that, but then it is not in a few months you can learn. You have to study for 20 or 30 years, and according to your capacity it will be given to you, because a man may be spirit-blind just as he is colour-blind on this plane, and I know

137
unfortunately too many of those who are perfectly spirit-blind.

The President: But yet the Stanzas up to the point we have reached them do deal with the awakening from the Pralaya.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly; but after that, when I come and say that so many Stanzas are left out, then it begins with the solar system.
