
A. Keightley: (reads the passage: Secret Doctrine, vol. 1, p. {60}.)

B. Keightley: That has means lies, that is what it is.

A. Keightley: But “has” has distinctly a meaning.

Blavatsky: It has not, because Astral Light expands. What is “has,” then, if you please?

The President: You can say a thing has something between it and another thing.

Forsyth: What do you wish to say then, madam?

Blavatsky: I would say it expands. It is a misprint, I can assure you. Look at my manuscript.

Forsyth: I would like you to think of a word and let us know decidedly what word it is.

Blavatsky: If they say it is correct, they are English and I am not.

The President: “Is spread.” It has that meaning to me.

Blavatsky: Will you kindly read this, Forsyth, because I take it for a misprint, and I know I would never put this sentence.

147
B. Keightley: You would often say this room has a door between it and the next.

Blavatsky: But there is nothing there relative to “has.”

B. Keightley: The Tetragrammaton.

Forsyth: “Has” means possession.

The President: We did not ask that question.

Blavatsky: What is meant by Astral Light is explained in questions 10 and 11. Why are you so very impatient, all of you?

Kingsland: I don’t think we misunderstood the meaning of that.

Blavatsky: Oh you are very, very pundit-like, all of you.

The President: I don’t understand what it means, but I understand what you mean to convey.

Blavatsky: What can be meant by Astral Light? The Astral Light is the great deceiver.

B. Keightley: We seem to have gone suddenly from the stage of the first manifested Logos, and landed ourselves on the other side of the plane of Astral Light and Tetragrammaton.

Blavatsky: Now, what do you mean? Allow me. “Thus is repeated on earth the mystery enacted, according to the seers, on the divine plane.” (continues reading from passage in The Secret Doctrine.) That is to say, the second Logos becomes a Tetragrammaton, the triangle and the four. I think it is as plain as can be. “It is now in the ‘Lap of Maya’ or illusion and between itself and the Reality HAS the Astral Light,” etc. Now, why did you come and pitch into me in my old age and dishonour me? I believe this thing is the most clear of all the blessed paragraphs that are here in the book. Is it, or not? I put it to the justice of those here. You see how I am ill-treated.

Forsyth: It is a shame, madam. I think your interpretation,

148 
“lies” in place of “has,” has a somewhat different meaning to the general reader. It certainly to me has a slightly different meaning.

Blavatsky: Maybe it is more English, but I would not put it.

Forsyth: If you put it in classic English, “has” is strictly a matter of possession.

Blavatsky: I suppose they understand it just as it is. What is it Kingsland just proceeded to scold me for?

Kingsland: I do not think it has been perfectly made clear yet how the three becomes the four.

The President: Yes, I think it has. I think the explanation of that is that the “four” really and truly means what we call the third dimension of space, and consequently is Maya—the Tetragrammaton, in one sense. You mean a different sort of four, and if it can do that, obviously there is Maya and the highest triangle. It answers itself, that use of the pyramid to explain the four.

Blavatsky: Just so.

Kingsland: Is the Astral Light used there in the sense of Maya?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. When you come there to a certain passage where I speak of the seven principles and the moon and all that, I show there are only four planes, that the three which are above do not belong to our terrestrial chain or to the chain of any planet. You do not know anything about it. You can’t speculate. I am not a high adept. I am a poor old woman very ill-treated here. We speak only of the four planes that we can conceive.

B. Keightley: We apologize to you, but the explanation of the whole thing is the pyramid.

The President: It explains it all, because we get in that four what we could not see at all, the third dimension of space, and consequently Maya. One is apt to look on the Tetragrammaton as above Maya.

149
Blavatsky: Did you read my article in The Theosophist on the Tetragrammaton?64 The Kabbalists say something else, but in my sight the Tetragrammaton is not very high. I have been just answering Subba Row. He said: “How can it be seven principles?” I said: “I am not going to worship the Tetragrammaton. I do not see why I should. I do not worship differentiated things.” “I know only of the Absolute and perfectly homogeneous. I can invent for myself any kind of conceptions and flapdoodles.” The tetraktys by which the Pythagoreans swore was quite a different kind of tobacco, if you please, quite another thing. You just take the third chapter of Genesis and the beginning of the fourth and you find there the Tetragrammaton. You find Eve and Adam and Jehovah, who becomes Cain. That is what you find. There is the Tetragrammaton. That is the first one which is symbolized. Then comes at the end of the fourth chapter already the human conception, and there is Enoch and there is Seth, and to him was born a son, Enos. And it is written in the real Jewish scrolls, “From that time man began to be male and female,” and they have translated it in the authorized—James’s version—“From that time man began to call upon the Lord.” I ask you if you can translate it like that, when in the real Hebrew you see men began to be called “Jod-he-vah.” That is always so, you know. They say one thing in the Hebrew scriptures and they translate it as another. They do not take into consideration the fact that the people had all symbolical and figurative language. Then they will never come and see this difference: it is always “Lord God,” or “God,” or “Jehovah” and all that, nothing else, and even “Jehovah” says to Moses that he never was called by the name Jehovah. Centuries and thousands of years before that there is Abraham, who builds an altar to “Jehovah.” Is it so, or not?

The President: In the revised version, they translate Elohim as “Lord” in the first chapter.

Blavatsky: They have no right to translate Elohim as “God” in the singular. It means “Lords” and “Gods.” Everything there is in

150 
the plural. They cannot go against the facts. They translate Abel and say it is the “son of Eve.” I say fiddlesticks! I say it was a daughter of Eve for Abel is the female aspect of Cain. When they separate, the first separation is shown in the first verse of the fourth chapter, when Cain was born unto Eve, and she said there, it is translated: “I have gotten a man from the Lord,” though it doesn’t mean this. It means what Ralston Skinner showed perfectly; it means Jehovah, male and female kind. Abel comes afterwards and is female, and then comes the separation of sexes. And then they say he kills Abel, and he doesn’t kill him at all—he marries him. That is the whole of it. I am obliged to tell you these things, if you are to learn. History is history and facts are facts.

A. Keightley: How does Astral Light come between Tetragrammaton and “reality”?

Blavatsky: How do I know? It is there. That is answered.

A. Keightley: What is “reality” in this context?

Blavatsky: That which has neither form, colour, limitation, attributes, nothing. A number that is nothing, it is all; it is the Absolute. Now, this, if I have not said it 120 times, I have not said it once.

The President: The whole of these questions have arisen out of a misunderstanding of the word Tetragrammaton. Now I think we understand what Tetragrammaton is.

B. Keightley: It is simply humanity, as far as I know it. Man.

Blavatsky: No, it is rather different—I do not call it so. It is Malkhut, when the bridegroom comes to the bride on earth; then it becomes humanity.

B. Keightley: After the separation.

Blavatsky: The seven lower Sephiroth must be all passed through. The Tetragrammaton becomes more and more material.

151
B. Keightley: And then after the separation he is completely Tetragrammaton.

Blavatsky: Then he becomes an M.P. or a Grand Master of all the Masons.

Kingsland: In one sense the Astral Light is between the four lower planes and the three higher ones.

Blavatsky: Between Tetraktys and Tetragrammaton there is an immense difference. The difference is because Pythagoras swore by the Tetraktys of the invisible Monad, which comes and having produced the first point and the second and the third retires afterwards into the darkness and everlasting silence, i.e., into that of which we cannot know anything. It is the first Logos, and this is the Tetraktys. There is the point. The point comes, that is 1. He produces the first point, the second, third, and fourth. Or if you take it from the point of matter, there is the horizontal plane of the triangle and there is the second side, the third and the point. Eliphas Lévi says many things to which certainly I will never consent, and he knew very well he was bamboozling the public. He simply laughed at people.

The President: At the same time he gives that idea of the formation of the four, inasmuch as he suggests it is the first triangle and the synthesis of it. You may perfectly well take the Monad which forms the 1, the 2, the 3 and retires into the darkness. At any rate it is not a great extension of the idea, and therefore I say he is really describing the tetraktys.

Blavatsky: And I just showed it to you. You take the point in the circle and you proceed and make a triangle from the lower point and take the plane of matter and you proceed like that, it becomes the reverse. He takes it on a lower plane.

B. Keightley: That is how the confusion has arisen in our minds. Eliphas Lévi is speaking of the tetraktys as the Tetragrammaton.

152 
Blavatsky: In the preliminary rules to the Esoteric Section 65 I said: “please, all those who want to study the eastern esoteric science, have the kindness not to belong to any society except the Masonic societies, which are perfectly harmless, to the Masonic societies or to the Odd Fellows, but you must not belong to any of the occult societies, that teach you after the western methods.” Very well; this morning I received an insult. Westcott66 writes to me and says: “I am a fellow of the Theosophical Society, and am I going to be blackmailed and sent like a black sheep out of the fold because I have belonged to a society.” I said: “My dear fellow, I have got nothing to do with you. You don’t belong to my Esoteric Section; you are welcome to belong to anything you like.” Now you see the enormous confusion it produces in you, simply because you have read Eliphas Lévi. What shall it be with others who study in other societies, which will go and say that the Tetragrammaton is the highest divinity? You will have such a confusion that you will never learn anything of the one or the other, and the consequence will be that you will be in the most fearful state of confusion. I said you may belong to the Masonic societies, but not to the occult societies. I am perfectly sure I have got enough to do. Whether there are 300 members or 30, I don’t care. It will be useless trouble to teach and teach and find they won’t understand it.

The President: We have no more formal business tonight.