B. Keightley: First are some additional questions on some points that we just touched upon last time. Stanza 3, Sloka 2: “The vibration sweeps along,” etc. (Reads from { The} Secret Doctrine.) The first question is: How are we to understand the expression that the vibration touches the whole universe and also the germ? For does not the germ mean the germ of the universe not yet called into existence?

Blavatsky: Now, will you put me this very long speech in very short sentences, for I don’t understand what you mean here. Maybe I have misunderstood you far more than you have misunderstood me.

B. Keightley: Not having put the question, I cannot say.

Blavatsky: Whoever has put the question, let him rise and explain.

Kingsland: I think the question has reference to the explanation with reference to the germ, that the universe has not yet come into existence, because the germ being only the germ in the primordial triangle—

Blavatsky: Then what do you mean when you say the unmanifested universe? Is not the universe eternal?

Kingsland: We do not use the term here—unmanifested

192 
universe.

Blavatsky: Do you say manifested? No.

Kingsland: We do not use either.

Blavatsky: If you do not use either, it means unmanifested universe, for here both are purely abstract terms. The universe does not mean the Kosmos or world of forms, but the formless space, the future vehicle of the universe which will be manifested. Otherwise how could we speak, as we do, of the unmanifested universe? The same for the germ. The germ is eternal and must be so if matter—or rather the undifferentiated atoms of future matter—are said to be indestructible and eternal. That germ therefore is one with space, as infinite as it is indestructible, and as eternal as abstract space itself. Now do you understand? The same again for the word vibration. Who can imagine that the term is meant here for a real audible sound? Why, it is figurative.

Kingsland: Yes, but is it not figurative in the same sense that the emanation from the first triangle is figurative?

Blavatsky: Not at all. It is figurative; but speaking of the universe, how can I say anything else? Shall I say, “the space in which will be the universe”?

Kingsland: Does not the vibration correspond to the point, the unmanifested Logos?

Blavatsky: It does. But it is from darkness, which means here the “beyond,” beyond the first Logos, even. That is what it means.

The President: Is it the ray from the eternal Logos that is the vibration?

Blavatsky: No, no, no. Read the thing again and it will make them understand.

B. Keightley: The first Sloka was this (reads again from The Secret Doctrine, Stanza 3, Sloka 2).

193 
Blavatsky: Well, all this is figurative.

Kingsland: And the whole Sloka refers to the period before there is any manifestation whatever.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. It refers to the abstract things, to the potentiality of that which will be. Space is eternal, as is repeated many times in The Secret Doctrine. Space is something that will be whether there is a manifested universe or an unmanifested universe. This space is synonymous with the universe. It is synonymous with the “waters of space,” with everything, with eternal darkness and with Parabrahm, so to say.

Kingsland: Then this vibration is before even differentiation begins.

Blavatsky: There I am just telling you. You read this second question.

B. Keightley: Question 2. Is not the germ here, the point in the circle, the first Logos?

Blavatsky: Precisely, and the central point being everywhere, the circumference of the circle is nowhere. This means that all such expressions are simply figures of speech. I think this proves it.

B. Keightley: Is that all you have?

The President: I think one sometimes does not quite see how apparently fresh terms are to be referred back to the old ones; but I think that explains it.

Kingsland: It seems to be jumping back a little bit. Whereas we began to be catching on to differentiation, now we seem to go back.

The President: The first Stanza is negative and the second positive, in a sense. Almost the whole of the first Stanza says: “There was not this, there was not that, nor the other. It is simply a description of the nothingness or the all”; whereas with the second Stanza we begin at once with that which precedes differentiation, the first movements

194 
as it were.

B. Keightley: Speaking of that which will be positive, in fact.

The President: Is not it rather that?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. Perfectly so, just so, that is what I have been saying.

The President: But it really refers to the same points.

B. Keightley: Then the third Sloka: “Darkness radiates light.” Question 3. Is this equivalent to the first Logos becoming the second Logos?

Blavatsky: Now, you see this question, if you only look back over the transactions, has been answered more than once. Darkness as a general rule refers only to the unknown totality, the absoluteness. It is all a question of analogy and comparisons. Contrasted with eternal darkness, the first Logos is light certainly; contrasted with the second, or manifested, Logos, the first is darkness and the second is light. All depends upon where you locate that or another power, on what plane and so on. Now, is this clear?

B. Keightley: Yes, and I am very glad the question has been asked because it has brought a general explanation.

Blavatsky: If I were to answer from every standpoint, it would not be 2 but 22 volumes. How is it possible to answer more than in general terms?

B. Keightley: Question 4. The phrase is: “Darkness radiates light, and light drops one solitary ray into the waters.” Why is light represented as dropping one ray? How is this one ray represented in connection with the triangle?

Blavatsky: Because howsoever many powers may appear to us on this plane, brought back to their first, original principles they will all be resolved into unity. We say seven prismatic colours, don’t we, but they proceed all from the one white ray and they will be drawn

195 
back into this ray, and it is this one solitary ray which expands into the seven rays on the plane of illusion. It is represented in connection with the triangle, because the triangle is the first geometrical figure on the third dimensional plane; and we cannot come and give figures which can only be represented on planes of which we have no conception or idea. Therefore we are obliged to take that which has a certain aspect here on this plane. It is stated in Pythagoras, as also in the oldest Stanzas, that the ray which Pythagoras called the Monad descended from no place, a-loka, like a falling star through the planes of non-being into the first world of being, and gave birth to number 1. Then, descending to the right following an oblique direction, it gives birth to number 2. Then, turning at a right angle, it begets number 3, and from thence re-ascends at an oblique angle (do I make use of the right expression?) to number 1 back again; from whence it disappears once more into the realm of non-being. These are the words, I do not know how to translate better—that is to say, it starts, it shoots, then having passed through innumerable worlds of non-being and formless worlds, where no form can exist, it proceeds and creates the point first. Then it proceeds to the right in an oblique direction and creates number 2, and having created number 2 it returns and creates number 3, and thence returns to number 1, and from this it disappears into non-being again.

B. Keightley: Where does the right angle occur?

The President: Is there a right angle? It is an equilateral triangle.

Kingsland: It is an acute angle.

Blavatsky: What do you call, if you please, a horizontal like that (drawing with pencil on a sheet) when it arrives here (indicating), is it not a right angle? I meant that obliquely. I had in my mind a different thing.

Gardner: It would be 45 degrees.

Blavatsky: (Describes the angle meant with a pencil on paper.)

196 
B. Keightley: The point really to get at is this: in the conception of it, are the sides of the triangle imagined as being equal, so that it is a perfectly symmetrical triangle?

Blavatsky: It is a triangle just as Pythagoras gives it.

B. Keightley: It is rather an important point, because you know that the right angled triangle is a very important figure in geometrical science, and Pythagoras was the discoverer of that very wonderful proposition.

Blavatsky: Of the hypotenuse, but that is not this. Then we will please put horizontal instead of right.

Hall: But horizontal what? You cannot have an imaginary horizontal.

Blavatsky: In this I cannot follow you. I am no pundit in geometry, mathematics, or anything like that.

Kingsland: It is a line at right angles to the radius, starting from the point.

Hall: Is it an equilateral triangle?

Kingsland: Yes.

B. Keightley: The moment you think of a point and the line descending from it, you have an imaginary horizontal right angle to the first line.

Hall: Then this ray first of all descends.

B. Keightley: Not vertically.

Blavatsky: First of all it descends vertically. It shoots like a falling star, as is said, and then it goes in the oblique direction; and then it goes in the horizontal direction, and then it returns like that, obliquely, as he says, and rises again.

Hall: I understand that.

197 
Blavatsky: That is just what Pythagoras gives in the old books, for Pythagoras studied in India and he was called the Yavanacharya.82 All the books are full of the traditions of the Greek teacher, because he was a teacher in many things for them also and he learned with the Brahmins, with the initiated, and he taught the uninitiated a good deal. Everyone says it was Pythagoras. Many traditions speak of him as going again into the country and the west and teaching this, that, and the other. I have been reading many things. He is called the Yavanacharya, the Greek teacher.

Kingsland: Then do you say when this one ray forms a triangle that it has begun to differentiate?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. The triangle is the first differentiation, of the one ray. Certainly, it is always the same ray, and from this ray come the seven rays; and the seven may be as the one that started from the unknown to the known, and then produced the triangle.

Kingsland: After it has got to the apex and formed a triangle, do you say it has begun to differentiate?

Blavatsky: Then it begins to differentiate.

Kingsland: Then the one solitary ray here is simply equivalent to the point.

Hall: I want to put one question. You say: “all the planes of non-being”; how can there be planes in non-being?

Blavatsky: There are, but it is too long to explain it now. There are planes of non-being. I understand your objection perfectly, but it is so.

B. Keightley: Then again in a sense there is something (of course quite in a different sense from what we use the word here), something you can call differentiated, though not as we know the term.

