198 
Blavatsky: I understand that is the whole question. It is not “differentiated,” but yet there are planes. To us, the lowest appear differentiated, but there, it is just that which is non-being to us, which is being and matter to others. It is all analogies. We cannot come and reach with our finite intellect that which is pure, undifferentiated first principle. It is perfectly impossible, not only on this plane, but on the 77th plane.

Hall: Then you can say in an instance of this kind, you never can reach any plane where there would not be a higher.

Blavatsky: I can assure you, you won’t. You must get disembodied first, and then you must be again embodied 77 million times. I would like to know, how can something finite understand that which is infinite? It is all human speculation, my dear sir, let there be the highest intellect in the world, the highest initiated adept. It is as Masters said: that the highest Dhyan-Chohans of the solar system can have no conception of what is in the higher systems—in those still higher than our solar system. It is a perfect impossibility, because, however high they may be (we may call them personal gods and far more than personal gods), still they are finite. They are not the unity—the Absolute, and the time will come when they have to dissolve, in whatever manner they may do so, whether cremated or buried, I don’t know, but there will be a time when the end comes for them.

Hall: Then, is there a finite point you might call, in a sense, the absolute finite point of the journey of all?

B. Keightley: Final point? You see, you cannot bring in any way whatever the Absolute in connection with the finite.

Blavatsky: It makes me despair that most of them must go beyond, they must touch, they must hear, they must sense, and in a way conceive it with one of their five physical senses, otherwise very few will understand. It is, my dear sir, the effect of your education from your childhood. All of you are brought up in a kind of material atmosphere, and you must have everything put before you so that

199 
it speaks to one of your senses, otherwise you cannot understand it. Even the God you believe in, you make something finite, you make him feel anger, you make him feel goodness, you make him smell sweet, and you make this, that, and the other of him and all kinds of things, just as though this God was a gigantic man and nothing more.

Hall: I mean this: when at the end of the Manvantara for the whole universe, so to speak, when everything gets reabsorbed into the Absolute, then when Maha-Pralaya is over, and a fresh Maha- Manvantara begins, might you not say in a sense there was, if I may use the term, a special point?

Blavatsky: But all this depends on which Maha-Pralaya you speak of. Is it that which refers to this little speck of dirt which we call our planetary chain, or is it the Maha-Pralaya of the whole universe?

Hall: Of the whole universe.

Blavatsky: What do we know of it? Why, in comparison with the Hindus, nothing. They just put 15 zeroes to show it.

B. Keightley: How can you answer the question? How can you ask it?

Kingsland: Have you read this last pamphlet on Parabrahm?83

Hall: No.

Kingsland: You would not ask it if you had. Read that and then you have the question answered. It is all there.

B. Keightley: Yes, it is all there.

Blavatsky: Let us hold to that which we can conceive. Don’t let us go beyond the limits, not only of the universe, but the Kosmos; and let us hold to our solar system, and that is more than

200 
we can understand or conceive of in all our lives. As everything is “as below, so above,” and as this is the first axiom in the occult sciences, therefore you can draw your analogies as much as the power of every man will allow him. That is all the advice I can give you. Some may go far beyond this, others cannot go as far as that. Everyone can conceive, but let us hold to this solar system, and it will be enough for the time being, otherwise we will go wool-gathering, and nothing will come out of it.

Kingsland: After this last pamphlet, I really think we ought to draw a line at this particular subject.

Blavatsky: Because the first thing will be that some of you gentlemen will have brain fever, and then I shall have the misery of seeing some of you shut up in a lunatic asylum. I can assure you it is so, and this thing can happen.

B. Keightley: I will give Hall a prescription. If he wants to understand the meaning of his own question, I will ask him to sit down for half an hour and write the figure one, and then go on for half an hour making zeroes after it. When he has done that I will ask him to state in words the figures he has written down, and when he has done it, I will tell him that is the first and second Maha- Manvantara he is talking about.

Hall: But in theory would not there be—

Blavatsky: Oh, theory! There you are.

The President: Take analogies, not theory.

B. Keightley: Sloka 4 (reads from The Secret Doctrine). Question 5:“Is the ‘Radiant Essence’ the same as the Luminous Egg? What is the root that grows in the Ocean of Life”?

Blavatsky: You see, this is again the same thing. You don’t make the slightest allowance for the metaphorical mode of expression. You are all the same, if you please. There must be a certain solidarity. What one says, another will say. I don’t make any

201 
distinction whatever there, so you are answerable one for the other. Of course the Radiant Essence is the same as the radiant or Golden Egg of Brahmâ. “The Root that grows in the Ocean of Life” is the potentiality that transforms into objective differentiation, like the universal, subjective, ubiquitous, undifferentiated germ, or the eternal potency of abstract nature. Now, is it so? Is it plain? And the “Ocean of Life” is the “One Life,” “Paramatma” when the transcendental supreme and secondless soul is meant. “Jivatma” when we speak of the physical and animal, or rather, differentiation of Nature’s soul—expressions all found in the Vedantin philosophy. Now try to remember, Paramatma and Jivatma are the same identically, and even the soul of a man and of an animal, a Nephesh, is just the same; but there is a distinction. One is the supreme subjective soul of the secondless, and the other is already in the manifested universe. Jivatma, that is to say, is the life that gives being to the atom, and the molecule, and the man, and everything in creation—plant, mineral, and so on.

The President: And the other is the potentiality; potency and potentiality express the difference.

B. Keightley: Then you say in the commentary, speaking about the Radiant Essence: “from an astronomical point of view,” etc. (reads from The Secret Doctrine, page 67, b). Question 6. “Is the Radiant Essence, Milky Way, or World-Stuff, resolvable into stars or atoms, or is it non-atomic?”

Blavatsky: In its precosmic state, of course, the Radiant Essence is non-atomic, if by atoms you mean molecules or compound units, for where have you seen a real atom that you could show me? An atom is simply a mathematical point with regard to matter. It is what we call in occultism a mathematical point.

B. Keightley: It has position, it has location.

Blavatsky: It has location, certainly, but not a location as you understand it, because a real atom cannot be on this plane.

202 
B. Keightley: That I understand.

Blavatsky: Then how can you ask? Just when you go on to this plane, you must go outside time and space.

Kingsland: An atom cannot, but a molecule can.

Blavatsky: What do you chemists call an atom?

Kingsland: This ought to be “resolvable into stars or molecules,” not “into atoms.” Now if you read it in that sense it will be all right.

B. Keightley: Then: “is it resolvable into stars or molecules, or is it non-molecular?”

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, because this world stuff from one plane to another goes and forms everything that you see, all the stars and all the worlds, and so on.

Kingsland: Then when may it be said to be sufficiently differentiated to call it molecular?

Blavatsky: Molecular, as you call it, is only simply on this our globe; it is not even on the other globes of our planetary chain, it does not exist in the same way. The others are already on another plane.

Kingsland: Is not the ether, for instance, molecular?

Blavatsky: I don’t know. It may be molecular; yes, in its lower or lowest strata, then it may be, but the ether of science, that science suspects, is the grossest manifestation of Akasa. When it penetrates something, or forms something, it may be molecular, because it takes on the shape of it. Now, remember that ether is in every blessed thing that you can think of; there is not a thing in the universe where ether is not. Therefore we say it takes a shape, but not outside of the gross matter, which is also that ether, only crystallized. What are we, what is matter, but crystallized ether? This is what matter is.

Kingsland: Then the ether is on its way to a lower differentiation,

203 
on its way from Akasa, and it will become ether in this Manvantara or a future Manvantara—what we now know as the physical atoms.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly that is so, but not in this Manvantara.

B. Keightley: I don’t know if I am right, but the difference as I understand it between atom and molecule, strictly speaking, is this: that a molecule must be composed of several atoms. The idea it conveys to one is that.

The President: It need not, there are also non-atomic molecules.

Kingsland: That is only a chemical term.

B. Keightley: And an atom is only one.

Blavatsky: May I tell you a thing and try to impress it upon you? You take a molecule, and fancy to yourselves that this molecule is an independent being per se. The seventh principle of every molecule will be the atom of which you speak. But you cannot catch it in your scales or your retorts or your chemical combinations. Now do you understand what we mean by atom? The atom is the seventh principle of every molecule, the finest, the smallest that you can find in this world. Why, what is one of the names of Brahmâ? It is “atom”. He is called atom, and at the same time that he is an atom, he is the whole.

Gardner: Is it Atma?

Kingsland: Now you are saying it in a purely metaphysical sense. It is very important it should be distinguished from the way in which chemists use it.

Blavatsky: But you are all taking your ideas and the correctness of your language from how the chemists use it. I am the biggest ignoramus in the world in regard to chemistry. Why should I go and stuff my head with the speculations of today, when tomorrow I may have to throw them off, and take up some other speculations? You

204 
have {not} come to that point that there is one single thing you can feel perfectly sure of, that it is there, and that the truth will remain. It is an axiom that the truth, or the axiom of today, is the error of tomorrow.

B. Keightley: I think it would be a good thing if you can give us—not from our standpoint, but from the occult standpoint—the definition of atom and molecule, simply that we may understand.

Blavatsky: Look here, to do such a thing as that you have to make a glossary and dictionary of occult terms. For instance, such a glossary as we have now, trying to give some correct conception of words which the Orientalists use without knowing what they mean; and therefore enlarge the ideas, giving them more definitions, more meanings, and trying to do something for the better and clearer comprehension of the people. But if we began now to use the terms from the occult standpoint, none of you would understand a word, because you have not got a conception of the thing itself. You have to study first the science and just penetrate yourself with all these things that do really exist on the occult side of Nature, before you can understand those terms. What is the use? Now give one question please, and let me try to see if I can answer you, so that I may see whether you understand it or not. What is it that you want?

B. Keightley: We want to know about this atom.

Blavatsky: I am quite ready.

Kingsland: If the atom is such an abstract metaphysical conception of a single metaphysical point, how is it that we can speak of molecules as being composed of atoms?

Blavatsky: I never said that. A molecule, one of these that you speak of, is composed of an enormous quantity of other molecules that you cannot see, and each one is composed of as great a number again and the atom is—that which you call atom, I don’t know in what sense, is some fiction of your imagination, but what we call an atom is simply the seventh principle of the molecule, as of everything

205 
else—of the smallest molecule you can find.

Kingsland: On this plane, take one of the metals, take iron. There is such a thing as the smallest molecule of iron, that is to say, a thing which cannot be divided without losing its molecular properties.

Blavatsky: What does it become, and why do you call iron an element? Why do you cheat the public and call it an element?

Kingsland: What does it become?

Blavatsky: If it loses its molecular property and becomes something else, what is that something else?

Kingsland: I suppose—