

Blavatsky: But science must not suppose. I ask science.

Kingsland: No, no, we are talking occultly, we are trying to get at what occultism teaches.

Blavatsky: When it becomes non-molecular, it becomes resolved into one of its principles, of which you know nothing. There is not the smallest speck in this world, which has not got its seven principles. Mind you, what for us is the smallest atom on the plane of reality is something very objective indeed.

B. Keightley: You see, the scientific idea of atom or molecule, particularly of a molecule (because the idea of atom is very vague), has not got anything to do with bulk, whether it is visible under a microscope or not. Their definition is this: if you break up a molecule of iron, it will no longer show the properties on the physical plane that we know have characterized it. It enters a certain chemical combination in a particular way.

Blavatsky: Certain, certain and certain, that is all.

The President: Because they do not know.

Blavatsky: Then why should they go and dogmatize? We say

206 
it is the principles; let us say the astral body.

B. Keightley: I am not speaking of what happens beyond.

Blavatsky: The chemists will not see the astral body of that which is not molecular.

B. Keightley: The chemical idea of the thing is entirely—and we understand it to be entirely—limited to this point. They do not know what happens to the thing afterwards, and that is what I am trying to get some idea of, what occultism says about it, because there science simply folds her hands and says, “I don’t know.”

The President: Isn’t it just as much a death of the molecule of iron as the losing of the physical body is called death on the physical plane? The remaining principles being there all the same, but minus the body. So the molecule is the earthly principle.

B. Keightley: Iron is not itself properly and occultly an element at all. It does not deserve the name.

The President: It is an element in one sense. It is not an element in the sense in which we speak of the four or seven elements. It is an element in the sense in which Crookes uses it. It is an element in the scientific sense—formed of the protyle or the undifferentiated matter. In that sense it is an element because it has certain definite properties.

Blavatsky: It is the elemental principle; therefore it is that they do not go beyond that. If you told me at once that they analyze or break up any molecule of iron and that it becomes two other things, that you could call elements. I would say: very well then, we have only to give a name, and then you will have something to speak about. But if they come and tell me it becomes nothing, why, go to bed!

B. Keightley: So far, science has not succeeded in breaking up the molecule of iron.

207 
Blavatsky: Then if it has not succeeded, why then does it speak about it? They don’t do so, and they speak of what could be done.

B. Keightley: Crookes says there is a probability that some day or another they will succeed.

Blavatsky: Then we will talk of it. So far they have not done it, and why should we talk about it?

Kingsland: Occultism says it is possible to do it; we want to know what will become of it when it is done?

Blavatsky: It won’t be one principle; it will be several principles. It passes from the plane of objectivity to the plane of subjectivity.

The President: The molecule is the final production in the differentiation of matter, and if you can destroy that said molecule, in the sense in which the scientists would use that phrase, you are simply going back into the undifferentiation.

Blavatsky: Take the smallest grain of sand and try to break it up and see what it is. You cannot get at the first principles and the origin of things on this plane, and Crookes will be looking for it for 30,000 years, and he won’t be able to find anything, for it is impossible to see anything of the kind on this plane.

The President: It cannot be done on this plane. You must be on another plane before you can do it. What Crookes has done with certain other metals is a very different thing. He has simply found there that people have been mistaken in thinking they were homogeneous, that is a very different thing.

B. Keightley: No, no! His theory—whether it is true or not I have no means of judging—goes a great deal further than that. He says that what are called elements—iron and so on, oxygen, hydrogen and so on—are, if I may use the phrase, points of stable equilibrium in the differentiation of protyle. He gives that curved picture, and he

208 
shows how all these elements representing different stages of more or less stable equilibrium succeeding each other in density or in some property come one after the other. Then the question is, what idea is it proper to attach to these points, which go at present in chemistry by the name of elements, looking at them in Crookes’ sense? That is to say they are not elemental bodies, but they represent these points of stable equilibrium, certain stages in the evolution of matter on this plane.

Blavatsky: I am not able to coin a word.

The President: You said something to us about the three first gases the other day, some little time ago, which may bear upon it. There is something in The Secret Doctrine about it.

B. Keightley: We want to agree upon some word we can apply to these things that at present are called elements.

Blavatsky: Shall we call it Anu? That means atom, but it is the name of Brahmâ.

B. Keightley: What I want is to name these bodies which exist on this physical plane which possess these characteristics.

The President: If you call them chemical elements, that answers the purpose.

Blavatsky: I think so; what name can we give? People will say we have a jumble.

The President: If we say chemical elements, we know perfectly well we don’t mean fire, water, earth and air.

B. Keightley: As long as it is said that the term chemical elements is not used with any idea that they are elemental bodies, but simply these stages of evolution, according to Crookes’ view; we can adopt that phrase.

Blavatsky: They are the false noses of the molecule.

209 
B. Keightley: That is rather an idea, that.

The President: You could not exactly call them the false noses of the elements.

Blavatsky: Well it is not a mask, it is a false nose.

B. Keightley: The whole position is that we don’t know what they are.

Hall: They are considered apparent, anyway, by chemists.

The President: I think the phrase best for them is, “chemical elements.”

B. Keightley: Have you got any more about the radiant essence, or did you read it all?

Blavatsky: Yes, I read it all. It is number 7 already we are at.

B. Keightley: You refer here, speaking about the World-stuff and the primordial matter, to the Hindu allegory of the “Churning of the Ocean of Space.” Question 7. Can you give us an idea of how the analogies of “churning the ocean,” “the cow of plenty,” and “the war in heaven” are related to each other and to the cosmogonic process?

Blavatsky: Now fancy only this: I have got to give a thing which begins at non-being and ends at the end of the Maha-Pralaya, and I have got to give it in one of the séances at the Blavatsky Lodge in five minutes. How is it possible to put such a question as that? If you gave me one-twentieth part of the first question, I may be able to do it. In the first place, do you know what the “churning of the ocean” means with the Hindus?

B. Keightley: I know the story, the allegory.

Blavatsky: But what does it mean in reality? It simply means an allegorical representation of the unseen and the unknown primeval intelligences, the atoms of our occult science, fashioning

210 
and differentiating the shoreless ocean of the radiant essence. It means that it is the atoms which are churning the ocean, and that they are differentiating the matter. It is simply an allegorical representation.

B. Keightley: It refers also to a process you mention later on, of the vortical movements.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly; but this is one of the details. I speak of the general aspect of the thing. This is the allegorical representation of that period. Now to give the analogies between the “churning” and “war in heaven” is rather difficult. This war began at the first vibration of Manvantaric dawn and will end at the blast of the last trumpet, that is to say, the “war in heaven” is going on eternally. Theologians may have taken one period and made of it all kinds of things, e.g., the fall of man—the picture that is given in the Revelation, which has entirely another meaning in reality—but this war in heaven is going on eternally.

The President: As long as there is differentiation, there must be war.

Blavatsky: You cannot say otherwise. It is just as light and darkness fighting and trying each to overcome the other. Differentiation means contrast, and contrasts will be always fighting.

The President: But there are various stages of the war in heaven, referred to under different names.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, there is the astronomical and the physical, and the war in heaven, when the first Manvantara begins in general; then for everyone every time there is a war in heaven. There is a war in heaven of the 14 Manus who are supposed to be the presiding genii of our Manvantaric plane, the Seed Manus and the Root Manus. The war in heaven means that there is a struggle and an adjustment, because everything tends to harmonize and equilibrate; everything must equilibrate before it can assume any kind of shape. The elements of which each one of us is composed are always fighting, one crowding out the other; and we change every moment, just as some of your men of science say. Or as one says when he is

211 
sick: “I am not anymore the man I was; I am quite a different man.” It is quite true. We change every seven years of our lives, sometimes becoming worse than we were before.

The President: Then there really does not seem to be much analogy between that churning and the other, because that is a special process.
