
Blavatsky: It refers to the churning by the Gods, when the Nagas came and some of them stole of the Amrita, and there was war between Gods and Asuras, and the Gods were worsted. This refers to the first portion, to the extension of the universe and the differentiation of primordial, primeval matter.

Hall: Even literally, “churning” means differentiation.

Blavatsky: Oh, my dear Hall, you are a pundit! But churning means also something else. There are seven symbolical meanings to everything, not one. This is only cosmogonically speaking, that is what it refers to, but there are others, too. You can remember in Revelation that there is a thing in the 12th or the 8th chapter when the woman comes.

B. Keightley: Yes, and Saint Michael and the dragon.

Blavatsky: This I do not want to deal with now. Ask as many questions as you like.

B. Keightley: Question 8. In what sense can numbers be called entities?

Blavatsky: When there is no intelligence, when they are meant for digits, then certainly they are nothing but symbols, signs to express an idea. They must be intelligent entities, then what is your idea of asking this? What did you think about it?

B. Keightley: I don’t know who put the question, really.

Blavatsky: Whose question was that?

Coulomb: Mine. I wanted to know what was the meaning of

212 
numbers.

Blavatsky: Why don’t you look at the fingers of your hand? You would see that you had five on one hand and five on the other.

Coulomb: But they are not intelligent. (Laughter)

Blavatsky: You do lose your time in making useless questions.

B. Keightley: Those are all the written questions.

Hall: I should like to know how you vivify numbers.

Blavatsky: I do not vivify them at all. That is how I vivify them.

Hall: How do you attract the intelligence into them?

Blavatsky: Ask another time, early in the morning. No doubt there are many things you would like to know.

Hall: That can be done.

Blavatsky: How they do like to ask questions that are positively—well, they begin nowhere and end nowhere!

The President: I fancy Hall wants to know wherein lies the occult value of numbers.

Blavatsky: Have patience, and you may learn it.

Hall: I did not ask so much as that.

The President: But you expressed your question in that direction. That is a very interesting question.

Blavatsky: You had better go and begin by the A.B.C. of the question, and just ask the first questions, and I will answer you. Don’t come and ask me right in the middle of a thing. You must ask me in order, and I am perfectly ready to answer you.

The President: Are all numbers that we have or can get all to be

213 
reduced to their various relations to the first seven rays? They all do fit in, don’t they, in some way?

Blavatsky: All, yes, all; because the seven are seven principles, but the first one counts for ten. So it is with the Sephiroth; if you take the seven lower Sephiroth and the three higher, it makes ten, that is the perfect number.

The President: So that all those combinations, all possible combinations, will belong to one or other of the rays.

Blavatsky: Surely, the white ray, and then after that, its gradations come and form the first one. You take the prism; in what order do you have the colours, do you remember? The colours are given. So it begins and you can see how it is.

Kingsland: Why is the radiant essence here spoken of as seven inside and seven outside?

Blavatsky: Because it has seven principles on the plane of manifestation and seven principles on the plane of non-manifestation. Can I say to you anything better? What cross-examiners you are.

Kingsland: Not cross!

Blavatsky: No, cross-examiners.

B. Keightley: There you get back to the planes of non-being.

Blavatsky: I can assure you if you only took the trouble to read the things and immediately form a conception in your head, it would bring you to the correspondences and analogies, and you would understand it without putting any of these questions; because, as I say, it is an axiom and a rule you must not depart from: as below so it is above, as above so it is below. Only put it on another plane and it comes to the same thing.

B. Keightley: To my mind this idea has become absolutely plain, that what we refer to as non-being and non-manifestation is to be understood as only referring to our intelligence and our

214 
intellect and to us. It is very evident you cannot speak of and you don’t refer in The Secret Doctrine to absolute non-being and absolute non-manifestation at all.

Blavatsky: I refer to absolute non-being from the standpoint of our finite and relative intellects. This is what I do, but not at all what it would be, because that which is for us absoluteness, perhaps if you go on the plane higher, it will be something relative for those on the plane above.

B. Keightley: And if you go more above, it will become something more relative. In fact, with our intellects we are in too great a hurry to get to the Absolute and so draw a line.

Blavatsky: You are all in too much of a hurry, and if you go on splitting hairs your brains will become like a homogeneous jelly. It is a very dangerous thing, this. Try to go one after the other and not miss any of the rungs of the ladder, or else it will lead you into some very extraordinary places.

Kingsland: I was wondering how far that would apply to the molecules that we were just discussing.

Blavatsky: It applies to the molecules just the same. The lowest one will apply to that plane where the molecules are seen and tested by your chemists.

Kingsland: But the seven outside would not refer only to this plane of matter.

Blavatsky: It does, and the seven inside, those that are beyond are beyond. We might just as well say 49, or multiply the seven ad infinitum. It is simply said to cover the ground, and so there are seven outside and seven inside—seven outside, that is to say, those that go down below; and seven inside, those we are not concerned with, because we would not understand much, because we do not know anything about them, but it does not at all limit the thing to 14. (after a pause) Well, everyone waits and nobody speaks.

215 
Johnston: I did not clearly understand what was meant by the war in heaven. Can there be something in a place of bliss which can amount to war?

Blavatsky: War in heaven means simply in space. If you talk of heaven from the Christians standpoint, of course, it will be heaven and the golden harp.

The President: Or if you take even the Latin caelum.

Hall: Or take the original vehicle—it means space.

B. Keightley: It is only in England, particularly in the churches, that the idea of heaven as a place of bliss exists. The word itself has no such meaning attached to it.

Blavatsky: Why, the Most High in heaven means simply the sun. It has meant it before Christianity, and it meant it after Christianity. For four or five centuries they had no higher idea of God, I can assure you, than the sun. Let them come and say now that it was a symbol and a visible sign and so on. I say that they had no higher conception. I do not mean the initiates, I mean the people—the hoi polloi—the masses. There is no fitter symbol in the world than the sun; the sun gives life and radiance and everything, light and being and health, and it is the Most High in heaven.

Johnston: I thought it referred to the Christian conception.

Blavatsky: After that the sky, which is the Dyaus, the Sanskrit Dyaus, became the God, and this God was as the Lawgiver. The Son and the sun in the heavens became the Father in heaven, while “Heaven” became the abode of the Father, and he was humanized or anthropomorphized.

Johnston: I see now in what sense it is used.

B. Keightley: You will find all about the war in heaven in The Secret Doctrine, second volume.

Blavatsky: You will see what it is, because it has great reference

216 
to the evolution of mankind, of the intelligence of mankind, when man sprang from the animal—not from an animal, I mean not from one of the Darwinian ape-ancestors, but simply from an instinctive mass of matter—and when he became endowed with intellect. Then you will see the meaning of the war in heaven, when it is said that the angels fought, or in other words, they incarnated in humanity.

The President: Now you have a special aspect of it, one of the many.

Blavatsky: Yes, the metaphysical aspect, one of the seven. There is the astronomical aspect and all kinds of aspects. Why is it, if you please, that they give in the churches bread and wine? Why is it that you have the Communion of bread and wine? Simply because it was an offering to the sun and to the earth. The earth was supposed to be, metaphorically speaking, the Bride or the wife of the sun and the sun fecundated the earth, and there was the wine and the bread. It is one of the oldest pagan ceremonials and festivals, which finally came to be adopted by the theologians in the church. It was a purely pagan festival. It was in one place called the mysteries of Proserpine, and in another place called by another name and so on, and then it came and landed in the church, and became a sacrament. There is the sun, there is the earth, there is humanity—the humanity which is not sun but son, which is the third, and there they made all these ceremonials and these mysteries. I am going to give in Lucifer the roots of ritualism and modern masonry, on church ritualism and modern masonry, and you will read it all in the next Lucifer. I begin a series of articles.

Gardner: Do you mean the sun represented it?

Blavatsky: No, I don’t mean that at all. The sun represented the father and the moon the mother, and after that humanity represented the Son and the wine and the bread were productions of the earth and were made sacred, if you please, in those solar ceremonies. They were offered to all the solar gods, to Bacchus and to Apollo and to everyone; “this is my flesh and this is my blood,” and so it is. Perhaps I hurt the feelings of some Christians here.

217 
Which of you is a Christian? I think you are all blue infidels, as far as I can see, and nobody is hurt much. Speak, any of you who feel hurt in their Christian feelings.

Hall: No, there is no Peter here.