

Blavatsky: Because you ask me and I am obliged to tell you what I know. If there was a clergyman, here perhaps I would abstain. No, I don’t think I would, because he has no business to come here if he does not want to hear things not to his advantage.

Gardner: There is a question I should like to ask you. You referred to it in the second volume of The Secret Doctrine, on the Pyramids.

Blavatsky: The Pyramid again has something to do with the Son.

Gardner: You say man is represented by 113, numerical value. Do you mean that is the Hebrew of the word man?

Blavatsky: Yes, in the Kabalah, it is. It is Kabalistically the value of the Hebrew characters.

B. Keightley: According to Ralston Skinner.

The President: But 113 adds up to 5; and the five-pointed star represents man always.

Blavatsky: It represents man by the letters, because the Hebrew word means man; if you take every letter and if you take the corresponding number and if you put these numbers together, it gives you 113.

Gardner: The numerical value of the Hebrew letters.

Blavatsky: Certainly, of the Hebrew letters. It does not mean at all the Sanskrit letters. I never said it did. Every system has got its own calculation. In Hebrew it is quite a different thing. If you take all the signs of the Zodiac and if you put them together and sum up

218 
the numbers, every sign of the Zodiac will give you a name of the 12 sons of Jacob.

Gardner: It is man in Hebrew. It is not man in English.

Blavatsky: No, but the English language has not invented the language of the Kabalah. It takes the property of other persons and then sets itself up as very high.

Gardner: And then I fancy there is a misprint here. You say 113 over 2. It has got 133 over 2.84

Blavatsky: Maybe there is a misprint. I am not answerable for that.

Keightley: I think it is in a quotation from Ralston Skinner.

Blavatsky: Ralston Skinner is a Mason and an extraordinary Kabalist.

B. Keightley: It is a mistake reproduced from a mistake of his.

Blavatsky: Just as I have taken it, so it is. If I had paid attention to it, I would not have done it.

Gardner: Then you take from the top of the great step to the ceiling {of the Great Pyramid}.

Blavatsky: These you can all find from Smyth.85 Ralston Skinner has elaborated it, but yet Ralston Skinner is perfectly mistaken in this, because he speaks of things as though really such a thing as the temple of Solomon ever existed, or the ark of Noah, and so on. Why, it never existed in those measurements.

Gardner: And that coffer in the King’s Chambers has never been removed.

Blavatsky: I saw it there a few years ago. It is one with the floor as far as I could see. I am not sure, though.

219 
Gardner: And do you know whether that is anything occult, that niche in the Queen’s Chamber?

Blavatsky: Everything has got its significance and everything relates to mysteries, to the mysteries of initiation. It was the great temple of the official initiation.

B. Keightley: Smyth’s opinions are completely knocked on the head. They are not correct because of Petrie,86 who was rather a pyramidalist before he went out there, spent months most carefully verifying all Piazzi Smyth’s measures, and he knocked them on the head by proving all the measurements are wrong.

Blavatsky: But Ralston Skinner does not take Smyth, and I have taken him out of it. For the last three years I have been in correspondence with him, and I said take care. It is so and so. I gave him the correspondences as it was in the Chaldean and as it was really in the Indian teaching, and he took my suggestions and he found three or four mistakes, and I have got any quantity of his manuscripts in which he gives his ideas; but he is not sure of his facts, and he is carried on by an idea. Now he has changed his ideas in the new book that he wants me to write an introductory chapter to.

B. Keightley: You see, all these fellows are very apt to get crazy after a fixed idea.

Blavatsky: You cannot learn anything unless you are perfectly impartial and have not got a hobby. Otherwise you are sure to get mixed up and you will come and not bring your speculations to fit your facts but your facts to fit your speculations.

Gardner: Isn’t it true that some of these men were seeking to find out other chambers in it, and one of them held up a light in such a position that no breeze from outside could touch it, and yet the candle flickered and he came to the conclusion that there must be other chambers, and shortly afterwards a message came from the

220 
Khedive87 to tell him to discontinue his researches.

Blavatsky: The Khedive is a donkey in these sciences; he is not even a Mason. He is a very nice young man.

Gardner: He might have the idea of doing so.

Blavatsky: The idea of what?

Gardner: These ideas coming at the right moment.

Blavatsky: I knew him when he ran about without trousers, a child of five years. I know him perfectly well. He was a very nice child, and he is become a very nice young man. But I can assure you he has nothing mystical in him.

Hall: I think Gardner means he might have been put up to do it by somebody.

Blavatsky: His father, yes. His father with all his great vices, with all his immorality, Ismail Pasha,88 was a man who had a streak of mysticism in him. He always had the Bedouins with him and the monks, and he knew some men who were extremely learned. But this one knows nothing; he was brought up by English and French nurses in the harem of his several mothers.

Kingsland: And he is not even a Mason.

B. Keightley: It is an interesting question to know this, whether these secret places, these chambers, do exist underneath the Pyramids.

Blavatsky: Certainly they do.

B. Keightley: They must be protected in some way.

Blavatsky: They are protected in all kinds of ways. They are protected by the greediness of the Arabs and they are protected in many, many ways, and the thing is that unless they go and turn off

221 
the Nile at a certain spot, they will never get to them. They have to turn off the Nile and get to the iron door that exists to the present day, and has not been opened for two thousand years. There is a Mason that knew it, a Mason named [  ], who was the Venerable of the Lodge.

Gardner: At the Cairo Lodge.

Blavatsky: One of your Lodges, your real true blue Masonic Lodges.

Hall: How could an iron door last 2,000 years?

Blavatsky: Why could not an iron door last not only 2,000 years, but 20,000 years?

Gardner: Would not it rust?

Blavatsky: It would not rust. Perhaps there are several incredulous; I say it exists.

B. Keightley: His point is any iron door however thick would {have} rusted through in a thousand years.

Blavatsky: It would not be destroyed.

B. Keightley: Yes, eaten through, perfectly porous.

Blavatsky: My dear sir, I tell you it is protected, it is not a door of such iron as you would take from a smith. Just as they do with their mummies, if mummies have lasted, then I suppose an iron door could.

B. Keightley: What is interesting is that the others are so infernally greedy; if they knew anything about it they would go for the things that are there.

Blavatsky: They do not know it. I spoke to Maspero;89 he is a Fellow of the Theosophical Society. I passed the whole day with

222 
him in Cairo. I asked him about all the papers that he ever found. Maspero is the Director of the Boulaq Museum.90

B. Keightley: Which, by the by, is to be no more at Boulaq.

Blavatsky: He was there, then, and we sat there between the tombs and the old mummies, and he was telling me of some of the things he has discovered, and he said, “never could I give it to the world, because I would lose my situation.” Because Marriette Bey91 tried to do it, and he was not listened to, and the academy said some very disagreeable things about all kinds of secrets that are there. He found a whole room, he told me—and this thing is known, by the by—and this room was full—Maspero discovered it—it was full of all kinds of retorts and alchemical things and those utensils that the alchemists used; and several parchments he found that he has read and deciphered; enough to see that they had all these alchemical secrets, and he found even some powders and things that he feels sure was the powder to make gold. He found it in this room which exists there to this day. I was going there, only Mrs. Oakley92 could not stop.

Gardner: That is near Luxor.

B. Keightley: What is he going to do with all his collection when he dies?

Blavatsky: He is a very young man about 38 or so. He is no more than 38 years of age.

Gardner: What post does he hold over there?

Blavatsky: Director of the Museum at Boulaq in Cairo. He is one of the most learned of the Egyptologists.

Here the proceedings closed.