8.
The Theosophical Society.
Meeting of the Blavatsky Lodge,
at 17 Lansdowne Road, Holland Park, W.
on Thursday, February 28, 1889.
Harbottle in the Chair

B. Keightley: Stanza 3 continued, Sloka 5. “The root remains,” etc. (Reads from The Secret Doctrine.) What is meant by saying that these remain?

Blavatsky: I beg your pardon. Those are Kingsland’s. Well, let them be first. It is Kingsland who asks this, and I am going to answer him first. All right, let them be. Now, “that these remain.” It means that whatever is, and whatever the plurality of the manifestation is, is all one element, one, that is what it means. It is always summed up in one.

B. Keightley: It really means they are different aspects of the one element.

Blavatsky: Of the one, certainly.

Kingsland: It would appear from that that it means almost that they remain without differentiation.

Blavatsky: Oh, no, don’t pitch into the style if you can’t say anything better. You see, I tried to translate as well as I could, you know, as close to the original as possible.

B. Keightley: Then speaking in the Commentary of Curds you say: “The curds are the first differentiation,” etc. (Reads from The Secret Doctrine.) Are we to suppose that the Milky Way is composed

224 
of matter in a state of differentiation other than that with which we are acquainted?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly it is; it is the storehouse of the materials out of which the new stars, planets and all bodies are produced. You cannot have matter in that state on earth here. It is impossible; it is quite a different kind of matter.

The President: It is protyle.

Blavatsky: Oh, no, it is not protyle, it is less but it is quite different. It is positively a storehouse of all kinds of materials, which when it comes on to the earth, let us say, or into our solar system, it is entirely differentiated. Besides that, the matter that you have beyond the solar system is entirely in a different state of differentiation.

Kingsland: The matter we see here we see entirely by reflected light. Do we see the Milky Way by the light we make ourselves?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly; you cannot see otherwise; it is impossible, you cannot. When they come and take the measurements of stars, and the distances, and all that, I say it is impossible it should be correct, because you must always allow a certain margin for the effect of optical delusions and so on.

Gardner: Refraction.

Kingsland: Then from an astronomical point of view is the Milky Way outside altogether of the stellar system?

Blavatsky: It is really and entirely another state of matter, and matter is, as I say to you, the material out of which everything will be made.

The President: But outside as regards state, not as regards position?

Blavatsky: No.

B. Keightley: Because, for instance, they have just been making very wonderful photographs of the nebulæ, the great nebula of

225 
Andromeda, etc.

Kingsland: Is that matter in the same state as the Milky Way?

Blavatsky: I could not tell you; I am not learned enough for it. But it is quite a different state of matter altogether.

Gardner: What about the planets?

Blavatsky: Oh, the planets are a different thing. You cannot find anything in the planets that there is not on earth.

Kingsland: Then the Milky Way, we may take it, radiates its own light. It is analogous to the state of matter that is in the sun.

Blavatsky: It is the “World-stuff,” as I call it. You cannot call it by any other name. I say to you again I am not learned enough to tell you the difference. I do think there is a difference between the nebulæ and the real Milky Way which you see, just as though it was like a highway of dust, like a film.

Kingsland: In other words, the nebulæ are more differentiated.

The President: But some of the nebulæ are resolvable.

B. Keightley: But they are clusters of stars; they are not true nebulæ at all.

The President: It has never been proved there is no nebulæ.

B. Keightley: The Andromeda.

The President: In other words, you have not yet succeeded in resolving it.

Blavatsky: Well, yes; but I cannot believe in it. I think if it is not today, tomorrow it will be proven that it has not been resolved or resolvable. It seems to me it is all simple theory—that it turns out something else, as many times we have been mistaken already.

B. Keightley: Then this matter, “Radiant and Cool”?

226 
Blavatsky: You just forgive it, if you please.

B. Keightley: As it stood originally, it is “This matter, which, according to the revelation received in the primeval Dhyani- Buddhas,” etc. (Reads).93

Blavatsky: “Radiant” it ought to be, and it is put “radical.” They have made of primordial matter something political. They have got politics on the brain! I never put “radical.” I put “radiant and cool,” I can assure you. I could find the manuscripts and I could show you it is so. It is one of these mistakes of the printers and sub- editors and so on. There is another thing I wish to ask. Why does Kingsland say this was seen probably by the First Race, and so on?

B. Keightley: He says—this matter appearing “when seen from the earth,” etc. ( The Secret Doctrine)—Kingsland asks: Would not this be to the perception of the First Race and not to our present physical senses?

Blavatsky: I say no.

Kingsland: No; that is answered now by the first question.

Blavatsky: Certainly, because we see just in this way.

B. Keightley: Then Sloka 6. “The root of life,” etc. (Reads The Secret Doctrine.) The first question put is: “What are the various meanings of the term ‘fire’ on the different planes of Kosmos?”

Blavatsky: Now, you see, there is a question again that they put me! I have to give about {the} 49 fires on every plane, and there are seven times seven—seven planes. I have got to give this very easy explanation, if you please. Now, how is it possible? Hold to something and ask a definite question. Fire is the most mystic of all elements, as the most Divine, and to give even a small percentage of its meanings in their various applications on even one plane, let alone on the different planes of Kosmos, is perfectly impossible.

227 
Now, shall I give you on one plane, in the solar system?

B. Keightley: Please.

Blavatsky: Very well; take, for instance, the solar fire on our plane alone. Fire is the father of light, light the parent of heat and of air, vital air, says the occult book, and the absolute deity can be referred to as darkness, the dark fire. Then the first progeny of Light is truly the first self-conscious God, for what is light but the world-illuminating and life-giving deity? Light is Time, what from an abstraction has become a reality. Now, this is which you could not understand. Do you understand the meaning of it? Light is Time, which Time from an abstraction has become a reality. If there were no light you would not have time.

B. Keightley: Because you would have no point.

The President: Darkness is duration.

Blavatsky: And there is no time in duration except in Manvantaras. No one has ever seen real primordial light, the one true light, but what we see is only its broken rays or reflections, which become denser and less luminous as they descend into form and matter. Do you really think with the physicists that it is the sun which is the cause of Light? We say (see The Secret Doctrine) that the sun gives nothing from himself, because he has nothing to give. He is a reflection and no more; a bundle of electro-magnetic forces, one of the countless milliards of knots of Fohat. Now, I want you to remember this expression, “knots.” Fohat is called the thread of primordial light, the thread of Ariadne, 94 indeed, in this labyrinth of chaotic matter. This thread runs down and down through the seven parent planes and ties itself occasionally on its way into knots. This is how they explain it in the occult books. Every plane being septenary—hence the 49 mystical and physical forces—the big knots form stars and suns and systems, the smaller planets. It is, of course, a metaphor, but the electro-magnetic knot of our sun and its forces are

228 
neither tangible nor dimensional, nor yet material or even molecular, as, for instance, common electricity is. Now, saying not molecular, I say that which Helmholtz 95 says, but I will just say what we mean by saying electricity is molecular. It is a reflection, as I say the sun is; the sun absorbs, psychicises, and vampirises his subject within his system. He gives out nothing per se. Now, how unutterably foolish it is to say that the solar fires are being consumed or extinguished. Were it so, would not the sun, while losing its heat and flames, be also losing something of its dimensions or magnitude? Do you think so? Is it possible? Must we think, then, that the sun is at the bottom a kind of round disc, made of some inconsumable asbestos, which, once the pitch around it is consumed, will get extinguished? Why, it would be that. If the solar fires were to go out you would see the sun shrinking or diminishing.

Kingsland: We need not necessarily suppose that would take place within any observable time.

Blavatsky: I do not know if they say it goes with such rapidity as that. Listen to Sir Wm. Thompson96 and you will learn what he says. The sun, it is said, does not give out anything, it doesn’t take anything; it feeds and works within its own system; it vampirises from all the planets and from everything that comes within it, and sometimes very likely it is almost impossible that anything should come into the sun from without the solar system. This is what is taught now. I do not give you my ideas; they are very heterodox, they are perfectly unscientific. I show you what the Occult Sciences say. They do not allow that the planets have been formed or ejected out of the sun, as the modern theory goes. They say it was not so, that the sun is not even what they say. There are no fires, there is nothing tangible in it; it is merely a reflection, a reflection of this. It is called a bundle of magneto-electric forces.

——: Do not the occultists accept Laplace’s theory? 97

229 
B. Keightley: That the solar system is originally a nebula, more or less, an enormous spherical mass of very diffuse matter which is revolving round its axis at a very great rate. There are differences, because according to Laplace’s theory, you get this globular mass spinning very fast. In consequence of its rotation it breaks up into rings. Gradually, owing to small changes, those rings get condensed and form planets. If they do not form planets they form meteors.

Blavatsky: Do you mean to say he says it is from that Milky Way we have been talking about just now? Then it is the “World- stuff,” and it goes into eternal rotation. It begins by suns and after having made the big knots it comes in the smaller ones, and so on.

B. Keightley: The point of that theory is that all these planets round the sun are formed from these rings; but elsewhere, in The Secret Doctrine, you state that before a heavenly body of any kind settles down to sober family life as a planet it is first a comet and goes careering through space. Well, that is quite contrary to Laplace altogether.

Blavatsky: Laplace is not an occultist, but yet there is something very near what you state. I never studied Laplace in my life.

——: This is the nucleus of the whole system.

B. Keightley: No, no, no, that is not Laplace’s theory.

——: Yes, he thought all those rings were thrown out from the periphery of the mass.

B. Keightley: No, in consequence of the rapid rotation. There are points of minimum and maximum velocity. These are not shown mathematically. There are certain points at which the strains (?) {rings?} are unequal. The space between two rings is left void by this process of condensation. Then if there is anything of that kind which disturbs the equilibrium of one of those rings it will gradually break

230 
up, but there is no idea of things being thrown off from the sun.

——: I do not mean it exactly in that sense; I meant outside.

The President: May I ask one question which I think bears upon that? Does the sun survive several series of planetary existences? For instance, in The Secret Doctrine you say that the present earth is the daughter of the moon.

Blavatsky: Daughter, yes. I know what you want to say; of course it is. Our Pralaya is quite a different thing, a very different one from the Solar Pralaya, of course.

The President: Because that, in itself, answers the suggestions that the present planets are thrown off from the sun during the formation of the sun itself, and is itself a contradiction of Laplace’s theory.

Blavatsky: I say that Laplace’s theory looks like ours, because we say everything comes from the Milky Way, and that it begins when the Manvantaric dawn of the solar system begins, and that it goes on. And they show Fohat running like a thread; and these threads sometimes get entangled in a knot, and the central star, the solar system, begins the little knots, and so on.

The President: Then the theory must be taken very generally, and certainly not specifically, as applied to our solar system as it at present exists. In that case that would simply mean the sun was, so to say, slightly older than the rest of the planets.

B. Keightley: It is said elsewhere that all the planets have been comets. I am not sure, but there is a suggestion, and I am not certain how far it is intended to go, that all the planets have been suns before they settled down to planetary life.

Dr. Williams: That certainly seems to me to be the universal idea, that there are various manifestations of life on the physical plane, and the quality of that manifestation depends entirely on the molecular relationship of the matter itself. There is no such thing in any abstract sense, as putting matter in one plane under one condition and in another plane under another condition.

Blavatsky: What is matter? Matter is simply a form of more or less crystallized and objective spirit, that is all, nothing else; and what is spirit? There is neither spirit nor matter there. They are all kinds of aspects of one and the same element in this life, if life is universal, I say there is not a point in the shoreless universe. How can there be such a thing as an inorganic atom or anything. I think Kant100 says perfectly correctly—he is one of the physiologists I prefer the most, because he is so very fair in his matters, he opens so many doors to everything, to the possibilities. There is nothing dogmatic about him. I read very little of him, but the little makes me think he is one of the fairest I know—when he speaks about the distinctions between organic and inorganic. He says just as we occultists say, that there is no such thing in this world as something inorganic. And you take, if you please, Huxley or any of the big bugs of science, and they will come and talk about the organic and inorganic, just as though they were the fathers of everything and they had created the universe. It is perfectly ridiculous.

Dr. Williams: What would you say was the relationship of fire on the different planes? Could you say anything of the relationship which fire on the lowest plane bears to fire on the highest?

Blavatsky: It is beyond our fine perceptive faculties. There is an unbroken relation, because one proceeds from the other. It is a

248 
falling into matter and a forming into density.

Dr. Williams: That is precisely the point I was after, if the one was the inner essential life of the other. If fire on the fourth plane was the inner essential life of fire on the third plane, and so on downwards.

Blavatsky: If you speak on the planetary chain, then it will be the seventh on our plane, that it to say, it will become the Atma. It corresponds to Atma on our plane, and we cannot see Atma, but if you can imagine yourself living on the A and B planets, so it is on the spheres A and Z, then it will become Pho {four}.

Dr. Williams: I was thinking more especially of the seven planes into which human life was divided.

The President: Speaking with reference to what was said about electricity being the fourth principle; the kama-rupa of the amber.

Dr. Williams: Yes.
