
Blavatsky: And every planet will become that which the moon has become now, and every time it will become like the moon: it will shoot out its principles and make another planetary chain as ours is. Our earth is very, very young, and such moons as ours there are but we don’t see them because they are nearly faded out.

231 
This one is already quite old. When they come and tell me that that moon is a bit of the earth, and that it was shot out, I say it is perfect nonsense. “When the day was only two hours old,” I think that is what they say, and now they have been making the calculation that to make the day 23 hours instead of 24 would require something like 600,000,000 of years.

Kingsland: You say the electromagnetic emanation from the sun is neither molecular nor dimensional.

Blavatsky: I will just explain this here. The sun has but one distinct function. He gives the impulse of life to all that moves and breathes and has its being within its light. It is stated in The Secret Doctrine that the sun is the throbbing heart of the system. You remember, each throb is an impulse, very well, but this heart is invisible: no astronomer will ever see any more than you, I, or anyone else, that which is concealed is that heart, and that which we see and feel are simply the apparent flames and fires, and they are only the nerves that govern the muscles of the solar system. Now, did I express myself well? They are not the muscles, they are the nerves, the impulses. This is a real occult theory.

Kingsland: But now there must be the material base in the sun.

Blavatsky: There is, but we do not see it. The sun as we see it is simply the reflection. It is simply the reflection of that which exists, a bundle of electromagnetic forces—whatever it is. You see, they call it the heart, but it is not the heart, the heart is concealed. What we see is simply—well, let us say all the planets and everything are the muscles, and that which we see are the nerves that give the impulse, you understand.

The President: Actually, we don’t see the material core, the centre, but simply, its surroundings, its envelope.

Blavatsky: Just so, the radiance that it throws off, but we can never see the real thing.

Gardner: And the sun spots?

232 
Blavatsky: That I have explained in The Secret Doctrine. Now, for the impulse; I speak of it not as a mechanical impulse, but a purely spiritual one. What I would call nervous impulse, if I make use of the right word.

B. Keightley: Yes, that is to say, not an impulse thought of as a vibration on the physical plane, of the physical nerve fibre, but that which underlies that in the same way that a sound is different from the vibration.

Blavatsky: Now you ask about the various meanings of the term “fire” in The Secret Doctrine. Under this term the occultists comprehend all. Fire is the universal deity and the manifesting God life; fire is ether, and ether is born of motion, and motion is the eternal, direct, invisible fire. Again, light sets in motion and controls all in nature, from that highest primordial ether down to the tiniest molecule in space. Remember this occult axiom: motion is the Alpha and the Omega of that which you call electricity, galvanism, magnetism, sensation, moral or physical thought, and even life on this plane. It is motion which is the Alpha and the Omega of all that, and motion is simply the manifestation of fire, what we call the dark fire. All cosmical phenomena were therefore referred to by the occultists and the Rosicrucians as animated geometry. You will find it always referred to as animated geometry—every cosmic phenomenon, every polar function is only a repetition of primeval polarity. Every motion begets heat, and ether in motion is heat. When it slackens its motion, then cold is generated, for cold is ether in a latent condition. Mind you I give you the Kabalistic terms and simply translate the things. Within the seven principal states of nature are the three positive and three negative principles synthesized by the primordial light. They are six states. The three negative states are: first, darkness, second, cold, third, vacuum or the nothing. The three positive states are: first, light on our plane, second, heat, third, all nature or everything in nature. Thus fire is the unity of the universe. Pure fire without fuel is Deity at the upper rung. Cosmic fire or that which calls it forth is every body and atom of nature in the manifested nature. Name me

233 
one thing which does not contain latent fire in itself, and then you can contradict me. Everything is fire, but fire under various forms.

Kingsland: In fact, it has as many differentiations as matter.

Blavatsky: Because fire you can never come and analyze as you do with air and water and say that is composed of such and such things. You know, broadly speaking, it is combustion, but fire is the one great mystery of this universe, and it is everything, and this fire is what they call Deity, and I say that the fire worshippers who worship the sun are a thousand times more philosophical than we, for this is the one great symbol that can be understood. I do not say the sun is such a very great unity in the universe, but in our solar system it is the ambassador, the representative of the real creative force or Deity, principle, call it whatever you like; you understand my meaning. Now listen: when we say that fire is the first of the elements, it is only the first in our visible universe; this fire of which we speak, which everyone of us knows under its various forms, and that fire that we all know even on the highest plane of our solar universe, the plane of globe A and G. In one respect fire is only the fourth, for the occultists say, and even the medieval Kabbalists say, that to our human perception and even that of the highest angels or Dhyan- Chohans, the universe, deity, is darkness, and from this darkness the first appearance of Logos is—what do you think? It is not light; it is weight, air, or ether, the first thing that weighs, that cannot be seen, and yet it weighs in its primordial state. Then the second is light, the third, heat, and the fourth, fire. The fire that we know, mind you; I don’t speak about the universal fire, that is a different thing. Now, will you please put the questions plainly, because I am rather tired of them. I want really serious questions. I get mad over these questions and I want to put things that I can only put when I am mad.

B. Keightley: Now that question of weight suggests a thing that would be very interesting. It is said over and over again in the [  ] theosophy that the scientific theory of gravity is untrue. Well now what do you mean, what does an occultist mean when he speaks of weight? Does he mean attraction?

234 
Blavatsky: Well I don’t know, weight is weight, how can I explain it otherwise?

The President: Does weight exist without gravity?

Blavatsky: Well it is gravity in the occult sense; it is not gravity as you call it on the Newtonian principle. We can explain it and do simply as attraction and repulsion. This weight is all because it throws out, it goes in circuit and absorbs again and it all proceeds to create all the universe and everything that is below. It always is this weight which you cannot say is above or below or on the right side or the left. This weight is something within but not within as to size, but within as to perception, differentiation and everything.

Kingsland: It is the same thing as we had previously, the expanding from within, without.

The President: The real point seems to be that if gravity is simply attraction and repulsion, that it must be the first of the attributes, so to say, of any differentiation whatever. As soon as you have two things, they must be pulverized.

Blavatsky: Surely.

The President: And therefore they may {be} pulverised in darkness.

Blavatsky: How can you explain otherwise the comets that go against the law of gravitation, how can you? It has been seen hundreds of times, comets in most cases go with their tails right against gravitation.

B. Keightley: They go and flap their tails in the face of the sun, in fact.

Blavatsky: It is an insult to the sun and the sun sits quiet.

——: I thought those tails were a certain gas.

Blavatsky: Even gases have some weight. I know it from the blood poisoning. Well, what is the fourth question?

235 
Gardner: I should like to ask about the question of weight with regard to that triangle. You told us—

Blavatsky: This is out of the programme.

B. Keightley: Number 3, you have practically answered. It is this, what are the meanings of “water” in the same applications?

Blavatsky: Well, water being composed of 1/9 of hydrogen (a very inflammable gas, as we are told, and without which no organic body is found), of 8/9 of oxygen (which we are told produces combustion when too rapidly combined with a body), what is water but one of the forms of primordial fire, in a cold or latent and fluidic form? It is nothing else. This is in reality what water is.

B. Keightley: It is the cold state.

Blavatsky: The cold and fluidic state of fire. It is the female aspect of fire, as matter is the female aspect of spirit.

Kingsland: Is there any connection between the numbers?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly. Numbers and colours, everything is connected. This, if you please, is esoteric.

B. Keightley: Question 4. Are fire and water the same as Kwan- Shai-Yin and Kwan-Yin?

Blavatsky: Reverse the question and ask are Kwan-Shai-Yin and Kwan-Yin the same as fire and water, or rather are the latter the symbols of these, and I will say yes: but what does it mean? The two deities in their primordial manifestation are the Diadic or dual God, the sexual nature and Prakriti.

B. Keightley: Then Sloka 7: “Behold O Lanoo,” etc. (reads from The Secret Doctrine). The question is number 5. Will you give us the terms corresponding to the three Logoi amongst the words Oeaohoo, Oeaohoo, the younger, Kwan-Shai-Yin, the Kwan-Yin, father-mother, fire and water, bright space and dark space?

236 
Blavatsky: No I won’t (laughter). Have you not just read it is Oeaohoo, the younger, the three stars? Why did I put the three stars “whom thou knowest now as Kwan-Shai-Yin”? You know it is that, well enough—or shall I give you a series of quadruple stars? If I put three stars it is not that I did not know the things, it is because I cannot give it. What is the end of Sloka 7, Stanza 3 (reads passage from The Secret Doctrine), the one manifested into the great waters? Think over it and you will understand all that is permitted to you to understand here, is there. Fire is spirit-matter. This water stands for matter. Fire stands for the solid spirit, water for the one manifested element. Fire is heat, water, moisture; you understand the difference between heat and moisture. One is male, the other, female, the creative element here on earth, or the evolutive principles within, or the innermost principles. “Within,” we say; all of you illusionists would say above, I just said to you there is no above. I believe the qualificative terms, dark space and bright space, give you the key quite sufficiently. I cannot give you any more, therefore there are the stars. I don’t know it myself.

B. Keightley: Question 6. What is the veil which Oeaohoo the younger lifts from East to West?

Blavatsky: The veil of reality. The honest and sincere curtain or act drop-lifted or made to disappear in order to show the spectators the illusion we call stage scenery, actors and all the paraphernalia of the universe, which is a universe of illusion. Is this clear?

B. Keightley: The veil of Maya, in other words.

Blavatsky: I beg your pardon. It shows us Maya and lifts up and shows us the veil of reality. He makes it disappear, just to show us the illusions that are on the stage. Smith playing Othello or anything else is a sham; it is only illusion and nothing else. I think this perfectly clear.

B. Keightley: Question 7. What is the “upper space” and “shoreless sea of fire”?

237 
Blavatsky: The “upper space” is the space within, as I just said, or the universe as it first appears from its Laya state, a “shoreless” expanse of spirit or “sea of fire.”

B. Keightley: Question 8. Are the “great waters” here the same as those on which “darkness moved?”

Blavatsky: Well, I wish to say one thing, that “darkness moved,” you put here in quotes. I don’t remember to have put anywhere that darkness moves. I don’t know on what darkness can ever move. I don’t know what they have been doing. I have heard of a darkness which was upon the face of the deep or the great waters, but even in Chapter 1, Genesis it is distinctly stated, verse 2, that darkness was, and that that which moved upon the face of the waters was not darkness but the Spirit of God. Now see esoterically the meaning of these two verses in Genesis. They mean that in the beginning, when Kosmos was yet without form, and chaos, or the outer space, that of illusion, was still void, darkness alone was. Now if you take Kalahamsa, the dark swan or the swan of eternity (it is interchangeable), and at the first radiation of the dawn the Spirit of God, which means Logos number 1, began to move on the face of the great waters of the deep; therefore, if we want to be correct, and if not clear, let us ask are the great waters the same as the darkness spoken of in The Secret Doctrine? I will answer in the affirmative. Kalahamsa reads in a dual manner. Now, exoterically, if you speak about Kalahamsa, I took them to task in The Secret Doctrine (and I was perfectly right) for putting such a thing as that, that Kalahamsa was Parabrahm. It is not so, but esoterically it comes to that. Exoterically it is Brahmâ, which is the swan or the vehicle in which darkness manifests itself to human comprehension, but esoterically it is darkness, itself the ever unknowable absoluteness which becomes the vehicle of Brahmâ the manifested. For under the illusion of manifestation—that which we see and feel and which comes under our sensuous perception, as we imagine—is simply that which we neither hear, feel, see, taste or touch at all: a gross illusion and nothing else. Now, is this too metaphysical?

238 
B. Keightley: I follow it.

Blavatsky: But I want the others to follow it. You are here always.

Tambaco: I think it seems clear.

B. Keightley: Question 9. In what sense can electricity be called an entity?

Blavatsky: In what sense shall I explain once for all so as not to have the same question repeated over and over again every Thursday? In what sense can I explain it to you? How many times have I explained it, and yet you come back? Electricity in a lamp is one thing. Fohat is the cause of that one spark in its millions of aspects, or the said spark in the lamps is quite another thing. Which do you want me to explain? Fohat is not electricity and electricity is not Fohat. Fohat is the sum total of the universal cosmic; electricity is an entity, because entity is that which is from the word [  ]98 to be and which exists for us, if not independently, by itself, apart from us. Fohat is an entity, but electricity is a mere relative signification. If taken in the usual scientific sense, Fohat is spoken of as cosmic electricity—as the sun is said to get in one’s eyes or face or in one’s garden, but surely it is not the sun that gets into one’s eyes or face. The sun is an entity, and you would hardly call the effect of one of its beams an entity. Electricity is the molecular principle in the physical universe, and here on earth, because, being generated as it is in every disturbance of molecular equilibrium, it then becomes, so to say, the kama-rupa of the object in which such disturbance takes place. Rub amber and it will give birth to a son whose name is Fohat, if you like it, on the lower plane, because in one sense Fohat means birth or life from an apparently inanimate object. Rub a nettle between your thumb and finger and you will obtain by the grace of Fohat an effect or a son in the shape of boils and blisters on them. That is also Fohat. All is electricity, it is all an electric thing, from the nettle

239 
up to the lightning that kills you, it is just the same. It is simply the aspect of that one universal fire, and this one aspect is electricity. It is everything, but in various shapes.

——: Do you mean to say there is only one force in Nature?

Blavatsky: In reality there is only one, and on the manifested plane it shows itself in millions and millions of various forms.

Gardner: Is the electricity in the nettle the same as what we have in the batteries?

Blavatsky: Most assuredly not.

Kingsland: The electricity that you generate, for instance, in rubbing amber, would you say that was both molecular and dimensional?

Blavatsky: Well, it is molecular, because it is the kama-rupa of the amber that acts; and certainly if it is to produce some distortions of the equilibrium it must produce something, because you cannot produce something in nothing. Mind you, electricity you will call an effect. I say the effect is molecular.

Kingsland: On the amber?

Blavatsky: Very well; but electricity, what is it? It is the effect of that which is molecular by itself. It is an entity, for electricity is the whole world of atoms in a certain state and under certain conditions.

Kingsland: Is there, for instance, emanated from the amber, matter in any state of differentiation?

Blavatsky: That which emanates from the amber is that which, unfortunately, your microscope won’t see. But it is molecular.

B. Keightley: But it is visible to the appropriate senses.

Blavatsky: Positively. It is estimated that there are some insects that would see it and you would not. If you had, for instance, the

240 
white ants99 that are in India, the most impudent of all creatures—and nothing in the world will make them get out of your way—they immediately will scatter like I don’t know what, because they perceive that.

Gardner: Simply rubbing a piece of amber?

Blavatsky: Or there is a tree in India which you will rub, and if you rub it, they will never approach it.
