
The President: If you can describe it as a kama-rupa, that answers the question.

Blavatsky: I cannot explain it in any other way; it is the kama-rupa, the disturbing influence which comes and disturbs the equilibrium. I cannot explain it any better than that.

Gardner: You mean the astral envelope of the amber?

B. Keightley: No, no, the fourth principle. Now, question 10. “You say that ‘Fohat is cosmic electricity’ and the son. Is electricity, or Fohat, then, the same as Oeaohoo the younger, or the third Logos?”

Blavatsky: Electricity is the work of Fohat, but Fohat is not electricity. The throwing in one shape or the other of molecules into new combinations of forms into new correlations or disturbances of the equilibrium, as you call it, in general is the work of Fohat, the emanation of the seven sub-logoi. I advise you not to talk much of the seven-voweled deity. I am sorry I wrote and published it at all, I am very sorry, for there they began to tear it to pieces and speak about it just as though it were a potato. It is the combined active principle, the electric force, life, everything that comes out and emanates from those entities.

B. Keightley: Question 11. Sloka 8: “Where was the germ,” etc. (reads from The Secret Doctrine). The question is: “Is the spirit of the flame that burns in thy lamp our Heavenly Father or Higher Self?”

241 
Blavatsky: It is neither the Heavenly Father nor the Higher Self. “The spirit of the flame” is simply speaking about the real bona fide lamp, and not at all metaphorically. It is neither one thing nor the other. He asks simply, the teacher, “where is the spirit of the flame that burns in thy lamp”—in any lamp, but not of gas, certainly.

B. Keightley: Now question 12. “Are the elements the bodies of the Dhyan-Chohans?”

Blavatsky: It is a perfectly useless question, because, read the symbolism in The Secret Doctrine and you will find the question. I cannot give it to you in talking as well as I have written it. Why don’t they read it; why come and ask this?

B. Keightley: Then Question 13. “Are hydrogen, oxygen, ozone and nitrogen the primordial elements on this plane of matter?”

Blavatsky: They are. On other planes, even volatile ether, I think you call it that—never mind. I want to show that which is the most volatile would appear as the mud at the bottom of the River Thames, or on the bridges. Every plane has its own colours, sounds, dimension of space, etc., etc., quite unknown to us on this plane, and as we have, for instance, the ants, they have quite other perceptions of colour and sounds. Those who are intermediary creatures, a kind of transitional state between two planes, so on the plane above us, there are creatures, no doubt with senses, and faculties unknown {known?} to the inhabitants there, but {un?}known to us. They will probably play the same part as the ants play here, because the ants come from a lower sphere.

B. Keightley: Just emerging.

Blavatsky: Yes.

B. Keightley: That is the last of these questions.

Kingsland: Does not the perceptive power of the ant—for instance, the way in which it differs from our perceptive powers of colour—simply depend upon conditions, physiological conditions?

242 
Blavatsky: It may be, but the wise people say otherwise. They say they can hear sounds we can certainly never hear; therefore, physiology has nothing to do with it whatever, because they do not hear with the ears as we do.

B. Keightley: They haven’t got any.

——: You can scarcely say they hear them, they sense them.

Blavatsky: They have a perception of that which we have not, on whatever plane it may be, whatever thing it may be.

Kingsland: Then we have a perception of that which they have not.

Blavatsky: Most assuredly, you are higher than they, but I say we will be the ants on the sphere above.

Kingsland: But how do you use the terms higher and lower in that sense, if they see and hear something that we do not, and we see and hear something that they do not?

Blavatsky: I mean high in general. I do not say in this particular instance. I simply say we are higher in general, that the earth is on a higher plane than the one from which the ants come.

Kingsland: Are they not on the same plane?

B. Keightley: I think it simply means earlier and later in the history of the evolution, a later and in one sense more advanced stage of evolution. The ants will pass through a stage, passing through the human stage we are in now, whereas we shall not. In that sense we are higher.

Blavatsky: I think that for you gentlemen who are electricians it is the most interesting thing, occultism, on account of its suggestiveness. It gives you ideas that you can never get from physical science.

Kingsland: I thought you meant that the ants might have the

243 
perception of a higher plane than we have.

Blavatsky: I never said that. I said they had perceptions of sounds which may be perhaps—well, I won’t say how many millions, but which are within—which are not at all on our plane, which we could not hear under any circumstances.

B. Keightley: But I think we might follow up that amber and the idea of electricity as a particular state of matter. It throws a great deal of light on the subject.

Kingsland: Well, of course there is a molecular disturbance of the amber.

B. Keightley: That is to say, of the molecules on the physical plane.

Kingsland: But then, electricity to be manifested must be manifested outside the molecular substance of the amber.

B. Keightley: That is a point that is rather curious to get at. We imagine we create the electricity by rubbing the molecules of a physical piece of silk against the molecules of a physical piece of amber; that is the way we look at it.

Blavatsky: We simply give the conditions to the electricity, which is latent in it, to come out.

Kingsland: Is there anything corresponding to an emanation from amber?

Blavatsky: There is.

Kingsland: Or is it a molecular disturbance causing a molecular disturbance in the aura of the amber?

Blavatsky: No. I say it is latent in amber as it is latent everywhere, and giving it certain conditions, that which is within and which is latent in the amber will get into a fight with the electricity which is outside, and then there will be a disturbance produced. You

244 
simply change the conditions.

Kingsland: Is the electricity intermolecular, and is it manifested in the same way that you could have a sponge which is perfectly molecular? Does the amber contain electricity in the same sense?

Blavatsky: I am afraid to answer. I don’t understand the question. I cannot answer you. I cannot take it in well.

The President: It seems if you use the phrase, kama-rkpa, that would be the best. I should consider that would be the same thing as saying it was intermolecular.

B. Keightley: But, you see, you have got your sponge and water—both matter on the same plane—but your electricity and your amber are matter on three different planes apart. That is to say, if you take the physical molecules of your amber as the first or lowest, the molecules of your electricity are on the same plane.

Blavatsky: Certainly, the kama-rupa, the fourth plane, that is what I tried to explain to you: kama-rupa. I am not a scientist, I am not at all an electrician or anything of the kind.

Kingsland: I thought you were using kama-rupa metaphysically.

Blavatsky: Not at all; perfectly physically.

B. Keightley: The great difference that I notice in the whole view of physical phenomena taken by occult science as distinguished from physical science is this: that in ordinary physical science we are in the habit of looking for the cause of things that we see. We rub a piece of amber and electricity is produced. The occult science will say by rubbing a piece of amber you produce conditions through which electricity, which exists latent and ready to manifest itself, can manifest itself on your physical plane.

Blavatsky: I find a far greater mistake that you all make in science, and it is the most vital mistake. It is by dividing animate from inanimate things and saying that there is such thing on the

245 
earth as a perfectly inanimate object. There is not an atom which is inanimate, not one. It is simply the most vicious kind of expression that I ever heard.

Kingsland: It is a very sensible distinction on our plane.

The President: Organic and inorganic.

Blavatsky: But there is nothing inorganic in this world; {in?} organic from your point of perception, but it is occultly speaking.

B. Keightley: Let us go into that question. What is the scientific definition or distinction drawn by science between organic and inorganic?

Blavatsky: Occultism would say to you, a dead man is more alive than ever.

B. Keightley: Please don’t suggest to Kingsland.

Kingsland: Ask Dr. Williams.

Dr. Williams: I think he wants to get Kingsland’s idea of the matter. I suppose he has got some particular motive.

Kingsland: But it is all pro bono publico.

Dr. Williams: I don’t know but what you thought he had some personal idea.

B. Keightley: I thought he probably had some clear notion in his mind.

Kingsland: If you carry it down to the lowest forms, one shades into the other.

B. Keightley: Is there any definition to be given what distinguishes it? What is the characteristic according to modern science?

Kingsland: What is the characteristic between you and a lump of wood?

246 
The President: You take the two extremes. Science has to admit there is the possibility of an entity or a substance to which they cannot assign either of the words with confidence. I say entity or substance.

B. Keightley: The only distinction I have ever heard put forward is this, the distinction of nutrition. Science will generally show—Williams, will you correct me if I am wrong?

Dr. Williams: That is purely an arbitrary one.

B. Keightley: But simply, the only criterion that is put forward as really distinguishing organic from inorganic is the function of nutrition.

Dr.Williams: I think the latest scientific views recognize no dividing line anywhere. There is no place where you may draw the line, and so this belongs on one side and that on the {other}.

B. Keightley: Even if you go down into the mineral kingdom, because you find in the phenomena of producing crystals you get some which is to all intents and purposes nutrition.

Blavatsky: I should like to know, if there was no nutrition for the inorganic substances, how they could change. The fact of their changing and crumbling down shows to you there is a growth, and that it is perfectly organic, as organic as anything else, only under other conditions. Have you ever thought that on this plane of ours there are seven planes? It is subdivided. This perhaps you have never been taught yet, that even on this plane of physical perception there are seven planes.

Kingsland: There are seven planes of matter?

Blavatsky: I define it so in the mineral kingdom and in the animal kingdom. There are planes for all. Just as I spoke of the ants, just in the same analogy there are the other things. When they come and speak to me about inanimate things, I say fiddlesticks, there is no such thing as that, it is impossible, because there is not a thing in this world that is perfectly inorganic—I don’t say it in the dogmatic

247 
sense, I mean inorganic—that is not susceptible to decay and ending. Everything grows and everything changes. Everything that changes is organic; it has the life principle in it, and it has all the potentiality of the higher lives.
