
2. Nyana: right observances; the keeping of the Five Commandments and the Five Rules.

The Five Commandments are:

(a) Harmlessness: the aspirant must use the physical forces in the spirit of beneficence to all that lives. He hurts no thing.

(b) Truth: precise and straightforward speech, expressing inward truth. The voice must have lost the power to injure.

(c) Abstention from theft: rendering each his due; not using more than one's share; making one's maintenance cost no more than is right; not taking what others need.

(d) Abstention from incontinence: control of the relation between the sexes; unloosing of the Soul from too strong attachment to any physical or sense expression.

(e) Abstention from avarice: covetousness is theft on the mental plane.

The Five Rules enjoin:

(a) Magnetic purity: internal and external purity of the three bodies; unhindered flow of Prana through the system.

(b) Contentment: mind at rest; not a state of inertia, but one of poise and balance of energies.

(c) Fiery aspiration: a sine qua non before a disciple is accepted. Zeal to win through is a primary qualification.

(d) Spiritual reading: power to discern things in their spiritual, not physical, aspects; inner vision.

(e) Devotion to Ishvara: consecration of the lower man to the service of the higher. Devotion to God, or the Divine Spark within us.

3. Asana: right poise; correct physical, emotional and mental attitudes. It coördinates the three principles of the lower man into a perfect instrument.

4. Pranayama: breath control; control of the subtle energies of the inner sheaths; leads to organization of the etheric or vital body.

5. Pratyahara: abstraction; withdrawal of the Soul from the interests of the outer life.

6. Dharana: concentration; fixation of the mind; leads to coordination of the mind as the sixth sense of the Soul.

7. Dhyana: meditation; development of the capability of the Soul to transmit to the brain its higher ideas.

8. Samadhi: contemplation; dwelling consciously upon the "things of God"; leads to full illumination. It is the final stage of

284

mystic vision, when the individual Ego looks upon the full splendor of the spiritual universe.

As the purification of the three lower vehicles proceeds, certain physical changes are said to occur within the head, following the awakening of the "lotus centers" below. "The vital airs" are organized to flow in regular currents up and down the two channels in the spinal cord; they rise to the head, circulate around the temples and pass inward to touch and arouse to active functioning the pineal gland and the pituitary body, located close to each other near the center of the cranium. This is the Kundalini or Serpent Fire, typified in may symbolisms of the ancients. Its play of force fills the whole body with light. It is so high-powered a current of etheric energy that its stirring to activity is attended with much danger, and, Theosophists say, should only be undertaken with the help of a Master.

No bizarre style of ascetic living is demanded of a Yogi. "Celibacy is not enjoined. Self-control is." If we may use Mrs. Bailey's words once more,

"The right use of the sex principle, along with entire conformity to the law of the land, is characteristic of every true aspirant."12

The basic principle of personal conduct is subsumed under the one rule: "Let every man attend to his own Dharma." The meddler, the reformer, the uplifter is looked upon askance in the Orient. The individual's kingdom to conquer is within. When he becomes master there he will be given larger worlds to subdue to law and harmony.

An interesting development at a later stage is the Yogi's increasing power to create on the mental plane by the use of the word or of sounds. He becomes a magician--a white one if his motive is pure and selfless. This power is achieved through continence, pure living, and clean thinking, and not through any perversions of the occult, such as sex magic, as emphasized by some so-called schools of occultism. The latter are on the black path, which does not lead to the portals of initiation.
______________
12 The Light of the Soul, p. 234.

285

There are four types of purity to be achieved, one for each vehicle: external (for the physical body); magnetic (of the etheric body); psychic (of the astral body); and mental (of the mental body). All kinds require refinement of the matter of which each body is composed. The law of synchronous and asynchronous vibrations attends to this, pure thoughts sifting out coarser particles from the bodies and building in finer ones. This is what is meant by burning out the dross.

Mrs. Bailey tells us that

"in this cycle the interest of the hierarchy is being largely centered on the question of psychic purity, and this is the reason for the trend of the occult teaching at present developing. It is away from what is commonly understood as psychic development, lays no emphasis on the lower psychic powers and seeks to train the aspirant in the laws of the spiritual life."13

"The pure heart shall see God,"--who is the higher inner principle which suddenly manifests itself to the open-visioned seeker.

It is most necessary--Mrs. Bailey agrees with Madame Blavatsky--that students should follow the means of Yoga in the order laid down by Patanjali, and should thence see to it that the purificatory process, the discipline of the inner and the outer life, and one-pointedness of mind, should be undertaken prior to attempting the regulation of the etheric principle through breathing. The premature awakening of the centers is attended with positive danger, as before noted. The natural barriers between this world and the astral may be broken down before the pupil is ready to deal with the forces thus released. The untimely development of the lower psychism is regarded as the cause of insanity in many cases.

One must be a mystic before he becomes an occultist. The mystic rises to God through the path of feeling; the occultist through the path of knowledge. Each person must become both, but more fittingly the mystic first.

The eight final siddhis or powers are given as:
______________
13 Ibid., p. 241.

286
