Chapter 2
First Principles

The scope of Theosophy is the universe as a whole. It is concerned with the whole and wholeness of being and with the place which humanity occupies within the cosmic scheme. From the inconceivably vast to the unimaginably tiny, the universe demon- strates an amazing and awe-inspiring order. Structures within structures, wheels within wheels, an ascending order of complexity characterized by cooperation and mutual interaction links every part together into a vast and magnificent whole.
The beginning and end of Theosophical philosophy is the inscrutable Mystery which has been called Parabrahm in Indian philosophy. Beyond qualifications and limiting attributes, It is called the Unknown Deity because it is “unthinkable and unspeakable.” As H. P. Blavatsky wrote, it is “devoid of all attributes and essentially without any relation to manifested, finite Being. It is ‘Be-ness’ rather than Being (in Sanskrit, Sat), and is beyond all thought and speculation” (The Secret Doctrine, 1:14).
The evolution of the finite universe within the infinity of Parabrahm has been an ancient philosophical puzzle. As the philosopher Alan Watts phrased the question, “If the ultimate Reality is formless, how can it give birth to forms? If it is spaceless and timeless, how can it engender space and time?” (The Supreme Identity, p. 63) These questions are answered by the same author in the spirit of the Wisdom Religion:
The infinite is that which by definition includes the possibility of the finite . . . If the infinite could not manifest the finite, it would be neither infinite nor omnipotent. (Ibid., p. 65)
Co-eternal and one with Parabrahm is that which has been called Mulaprakriti or root-substance. It is this which Alan Watts has called “the possibility of the finite” which exists within the infinite. By a process beyond the comprehension of our limited mentality, Mulaprakriti differentiates and transforms itself into prakriti or substance. The differentiated prakriti consists of seven “elements,” one of which is the electro- magnetic energy which becomes the “matter” known to science. This brings the universe into a state of active manifestation which is called a manvantara. A reverse process of withdrawal brings the universe once more into a state of absorption within Mulaprakriti; this resting state is called a pralaya. Theosophy teaches that these pro- cesses alternate continually throughout the endless duration of eternity. This cyclic alternation has been metaphorically called the outbreathing and inbreathing  of  the Great Breath.
 
During cosmic pralaya, the universe being reduced to its ultimate simplicity, everything rests in silent repose. All has become one. At the dawn of the cosmic manvantara, Mulaprakriti differentiates, its primordial simplicity becoming more and more complex, forming all the visible and invisible forms of substance in the universe. Science teaches that matter exists in many states. There would seem to be a definite hierarchy of particles and sub-particles as matter differentiates into denser and denser forms. This is an old teaching of occultism. Mulaprakriti is the true Prima Materia underlying all substance. In itself it is not matter but the precursor of matter, differ- entiating periodically during manvantaras, and then once more resolving into its undifferentiated state during pralayas.
Parabrahm is at once transcendent and immanent. Its immanent aspect, ensouling and vivifying Mulaprakriti and its differentiations, has been called the Logos. Logos is a Greek expression whose meaning includes “word,” “reason,” and “order.” Just as a spoken word is the expression of a thought, so the Logos is the expression of the abso- lute, unconditioned Thought which is Parabrahm. The Logos is the Divine Mind which is the law and order of the Cosmos. It has been described by T. Subba Row, a disciple of HPB’s Guru, as “a centre of spiritual energy which is unborn and eternal, and which exists in a latent condition in the bosom of Parabrahm at the time of pralaya, and starts as a centre of conscious energy at the time of cosmic activity”(T. Subba Row Collected Writings, 2:457). T. Subba Row adds that, “In its inmost nature it is not unknowable as Parabrahm, but it is an object of the highest knowledge that man is capable of acquiring .
. . it is not different in substance, as it were, or in essence, from Parabrahm, and yet at the same time it is different from it in having an individualized existence.” The infinity of Parabrahm contains innumerable Logoi. Each Logos is the spiritual life of a universe which expresses itself in every galaxy, solar system, and planet within its boundless domain. One of the Sacred Scriptures of India expresses the idea in the following manner:
The tree of Eternity has its roots in heaven above and its branches reach down to earth. It is Brahman, pure Spirit, who in truth is called the immortal. All the worlds rest on that Spirit and beyond him no one can go . . . The whole uni- verse comes from him and his life burns through the whole universe. (Katha Upanishad, 3: 1)
A distinction is made between the Logos as an eternal potentiality within Parabrahm and that same Logos as the manifested Divine Radiance, the guiding intelligence of its universe. As an eternal potentiality the Logos is called “Aja,” the unborn. As the active manvantaric divine intelligence, bursting forth from its latency to give life and light to the universe, it is “reborn” with each manvantara. In the latter aspect it is the “First Born of all creation.” This is what has become the basis for the Christian doctrine of the immaculate conception. With the differentiation of
 
Mulaprakriti, a great primordial cosmic miracle takes place: the reflection of the “Unborn” in the seemingly differentiated universe as the Active Creative Deity, or Manifested Logos. The Logos is the Divine Son, born of the cosmic virgin, Substance, before all worlds. Having manifested substance as his “mother” he cannot have  a father, the unmanifested Potentiality being absolute and sexless. In all the most ancient cosmogonies, it is the Mother who emerges first from the Unknown Darkness. Within her immaculate womb springs forth the Son, or Logos, who becomes in his turn the Father. This son is the manifested God, the Logos or Verbum, in whom are contained the hosts of creative intelligences, the “Sons of God.”
It is these creative hosts, these sons of God, which collectively constitute the Manifested Logos. They are variously referred to as “Atmic rays,” “facets of the eternal,” or “beams of the Spiritual Sun.” The action of these hosts of creative intel- ligences in nature―their directing activity―is called Fohat, the “Son of the Sons.” It is the out-turned creative activity of the “Sons” acting on prakriti and is sometimes called the “Light of the Logos.” It is this which is the link between Cosmic Mind and Cosmic Matter. Cosmic Mind is the collective Logos, the “Army of the Voice.” Cosmic Matter is prakriti, the elements which differentiate from Mulaprakriti. Fohat, also known as Daiviprakriti, is the mysterious power by which the Logos acts on prakriti imparting to it life and consciousness.
H. P. Blavatsky describes Fohat as “that occult, electric, vital power, which, under the Will of the Creative Logos, unites and brings together all forms, giving them the first impulse which becomes in time law”(The Secret Doctrine, 1:109). It is, she writes, the “electric vital power, the transcendental binding Unity of all Cosmic Energies, on the unseen as on the manifested planes, the action of which resembles―on an immense scale―that of a living Force created by WILL, in those phenomena where the seemingly subjective acts on the seemingly objective and propels it to action . . . It is present in the constructive power that carries out, in the formation of things―from the planetary system down to the glowworm and simple daisy―the plan in the mind of nature, or in the Divine Thought”(Ibid., 1:111).
This “Light of the Logos” is the source of all consciousness and awareness, of all life and vitality. Theosophy asserts that the great “Army of the Voice” is active in all things, hence everything is alive and conscious. The paleontologist and philosopher Teilhard de Chardin states in his book The Phenomenon of Man that “the apparent restriction of consciousness to the higher forms of life has long served science as an excuse for eliminating it from its model of the universe”(p. 55). Theosophy presents a model of the universe in which consciousness plays a major part, declaring emphatically that there is a Universal Conscious Energy—the Light of the Logos—lighting up the universe from within with the light of intelligent, conscious life. Thus all the kingdoms of terrestrial
 
life represent the activity of the creative Logos made manifest in matter through the action of Fohat. The culmination of the life-process on earth is humankind, which collectively represents the embodiment of the Logos or, in the terminology of the Christian mysteries, “the Word made flesh.”
Blavatsky has summarized these ideas in the following passage from The Secret Doctrine:
Manvantaric impulse commences with the re-awakening of Cosmic Ideation (the “Universal Mind”), concurrently with, and parallel to, the primary emergence of Cosmic Substance—the latter being the manvantaric vehicle of the former—from its undifferentiated pralayic state. Then, absolute wisdom mirrors itself in its Ideation; which, by a transcendental process, superior to and incomprehensible by human Consciousness, results in Cosmic Energy (Fohat). Thrilling through the body of inert Substance, Fohat impels it to activity, and guides its primary differentiations on all the Seven planes of Cosmic Consciousness. (1: 328)


Questions from Students
Q: Going back to the beginning, I don’t understand why it all happens in the first place. Why does Parabrahm create the universe?
A: Somebody asked HPB that question once. Her answer was, “Don’t ask me. Ask Parabrahm.” Seriously, though, in thinking through this question we need to make one thing clear. Parabrahm does not create the universe. Parabrahm does not differentiate. Parabrahm does not do anything. Mulaprakriti, Parabrahm’s veil, is said to differentiate and become the universe, but for all that there is no such thing as Creation as understood by Western theology. As one of the Masters of Wisdom said,
Go on saying: “Our planet and men were created”―and you will be fighting against hard facts forever, analyzing, and losing time over trifling details— unable to ever grasp the whole. But once admit that our planet and ourselves are no more creations than the iceberg now before me . . . that both planet and man are—states for a given time; that their present appearance—geological and anthropological—is transitory and but a condition concomitant of that stage of evolution at which they have arrived . . . and all will become plain. (The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, pp. 119-120)
Mulaprakriti differentiates because of unexpended karma from past cycles of the universe. This has always been going on and will continue always. Karma simply means action and reaction. When our universe ends its long manvan- tara, there will still be things remaining to be done, action which has not yet
 
had its reaction, causes yet to bear their karmic fruit. These will necessitate another universal “reincarnation” in which to work themselves out. And that cycle will demand another, and so on and on. It never began and will never end.

Q: How do the occult ideas about Mulaprakriti, cosmic matter, and the rest compare with the concepts of science?
A: Science has come a long way since the days of HPB. The scientists of her day thought that matter was composed of tiny, billiard-ball atoms that were incapable of further division. They didn’t fully understand electricity and  called it a “mode of motion” to hide their ignorance. They even laughed when the Theosophists said that it was composed of corpuscular units. The idea that the universe arose within a Deity that was identified with Space, and that that so-called empty space was in reality a plenum, a “fullness” from which all the matter in the universe “differentiated,” was hooted at as being absurd.
But what has science discovered since the time of HPB? They know now that the atom is divisible and many subatomic particles have been discovered. One of these particles, the electron, is the corpuscular unit of electricity that the Theosophists were talking about. Not only this, but the electron is regarded now as one member of a pair of particles which was produced when that electron was hurled from a state of suspension within “empty” space (laya is the Eastern expression), leaving a “hole in space” or a positron in its place. “Empty” space, science now teaches, is jammed full of matter in states of “negative energy.” When a particle assumes a state of positive energy, a complementary “hole” is left in the deserted negative energy state, which then may be interpreted as an anti-particle. Thus from “empty space” appear the countless “pairs” of complementary particles. This corresponds in occultism to the differentiation of prakriti from Mulaprakriti. “The great Breath digs through Space seven holes into Laya to cause them to circumgyrate during Manvantara” (The Secret Doctrine, 1:147).

Q:	Does the term Logos correspond to the God of the Christian religion?
A: If you refer to the religion of some of the great Christian mystics, such as  Meister Eckhart, there may be similarities. In Eckhart’s terminology, God corresponds to the Logos and the Godhead to Parabrahm. It is analogous to the Saguna Brahman (Deity with attributes) and Nirguna Brahman (Deity without attributes) of Hindu Philosophy. If, on the other hand, you mean God in the sense of a personal creator, judge, redeemer, etc., as depicted in popular
 
Christianity, such a god-idea corresponds neither to the Logos nor to the Parabrahm of the esoteric teaching. HPB summed it up very aptly when she wrote the following:
It is not the One Unknown ever-present God in Nature, or Nature in  abscondito, that is rejected, but the God of human dogma and his humanized “word.” In his infinite conceit and inherent pride and vanity, man shaped it himself with his sacrilegious hand out of the material he found in his own small brain-fabric, and forced it upon mankind as a direct revelation from the one unrevealed SPACE. (The Secret Doctrine, 1: 9)

Q: I have read in some Theosophical books about the Solar Logos building the solar system through three outpourings. Could you elaborate further on this?
A: The Logos is the central source of Light and Life for the entire universe, which includes countless millions of solar systems. Its rays—which are itself—are the Atmic beams, one of which overshadows every intelligent being, from a human being to the highest archangels. Collectively, all of these rays comprise the Logos. In the Stanzas of Dzyan, they are called the “Army of the Voice.” The term “Solar Logos” may be correctly applied to that portion of these rays that are active in our solar system, just as the term “Pacific Fleet” refers to that portion of the U. S. Navy which is engaged in action in the Pacific Ocean.
There is, in our system, a presiding Hierarch—a highly-developed Dhyan Chohan or archangel—who is the Supreme Lord of evolution within the solar system. If you want to call this Great Being a Solar Logos in the sense that a famous monarch once said, “I am the state,” it is perhaps permissible, provid- ing you remember that this being is but the head of a whole hierarchy of spir- itual lives. For all that, it is misleading to think in terms of a gigantic, super- being acting in ways described in some of the literature. The same thing may be said of the “Planetary Logos” which, like the solar host, does exist as a division of the cosmic host but does not exist in any anthropomorphized form.


 

REFERENCES FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING:
Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, “Proem.”
Row, T. Subba Row Collected Writings, “Notes on the Bhagavad Gita, I.”


QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
1.	Read pages 14-18 of the Proem in The Secret Doctrine. Summarize in your own words the three fundamental propositions as expounded by HPB. Please try to describe them in your own words, avoiding direct quotations from the text.
2.	Do you think the word Logos as used in the Proem refers to a specific being? Explain.
3.	What brings the universe into manifestation?
4.	What is the role of Fohat in cosmic evolution?
5.	What part does humanity play in cosmic evolution?
6.	This chapter introduces Sanskrit terms which may be new to you. It is better not to treat them as having rigid definitions or definite English equivalents. The larger meaning of the words becomes clearer with continued reading and greater familiarity. For the time being, match words in column A with meanings in column B.

A	B
Parabrahm	A cyclical period of manifestation or activity, which occurs between two pralayas.
Mulaprakriti	A cyclical period of non-manifestation or
inactivity, which occurs between two manvantaras.
Pralaya	Indwelling and inherent within the universe.
Transcendent	The absolute, ultimate Reality.
Manvantara	The “root” of matter, or cosmic basis from
which matter arises.
Immanent	Above and beyond the universe.
