Chapter 3
Microcosm

We are familiar with the visible human body composed of chemical substances; many people are content to regard this as if it were all there were to a human being. The Wisdom Tradition asserts that the physical body that we see and touch is a comparativ- ely unimportant aspect of the human constitution. As the greatest part of an iceberg lies concealed beneath the waves of the ocean while its tip protrudes above, so the greatest part of a person exists in the unseen realms beyond the physical.
The esoteric philosophy refers to seven “sheaths”4 which serve as successive veils of graduated density around the underlying Divine Spark which is one’s  innermost nature. The latter is one of the Divine Sons, an undetached ray of the Logos. The seven vehicles, or sheaths, are said to interpenetrate one another as a liquid may penetrate a solid while in turn being interpenetrated by a gas. Each sheath is derived from one of the seven elements that differentiate from Mulaprakriti. Collectively, the seven are overshadowed by the Divine Spark. The seven sheaths may be listed as follows:


Shining its Divine Light into the seven-fold human being is an undetached spark (Scintilla) of the Logos. This is the Divine Atma or Higher Self, the Immortal Spirit. This was described by HPB as follows:
Each immortal spirit that sheds its radiance upon a human being is a god—the Microcosmos of the Macrocosmos, part and parcel of the Unknown God, the First Cause of which it is a direct emanation. It is possessed of all the attributes of



4 These “sheaths” may be divided and classified in various ways. The classification used here was employed by HPB in the last years of her life. See “Questions and Answers” and Appendix I for alternative divisions.
 
its parent source. Among these attributes are omniscience and omnipotence. (Isis Unveiled, 2: 153)
It should be kept in mind that there is in reality only one Atma, the seemingly individual spirits of men and women being but the facets of the One Spirit. Although there are seven interpenetrating vehicles or sheaths, we may simplify the picture since some of the principles work together. Thus the first three (counting from within out- ward)—auric envelope, buddhi, and higher manas (overshadowed by the Atma)— cohere together and constitute the permanent entity or monad which passes from life to life. This is sometimes called the karana sharira or causal body. The next two—lower manas and kama—likewise cohere and constitute the so-called astral soul or that which is called in the East the sukshma sharira or the mayavi rupa. The next vehicle, the astral body or etheric double, is the so-called “model-body” around which the physical form is built. On the lowest level is the gross, physical form.
We may now examine the various levels in greater detail, working from without inward. Moving beyond the atoms and subatomic particles of the physical world, we encounter the state of matter immediately “within” the physical. The human form here, composed of matter only slightly finer than physical matter, is the astral body 5 or etheric double. In Eastern occultism this body is often called the Linga Sharira which means “model body” since it is supposed to serve as a sort of field of force and vitality over which the physical body is built. In addition to these functions, it evidences the properties of sensation. It is said that the true organs of sensation are in the astral body. It is the astral eye that really sees, the astral ear that really hears, etc.
Moving into finer and finer layers of matter, we penetrate the veil which separates astral matter from kamic matter. Kama is a Sanskrit word meaning “desire.” In this third state of matter, life manifests a higher form of consciousness than sensation. Here, thrilling through kamic matter, it gives rise to the lower sorts of emotion, passions, appetites, and desires. As we continue inwardly, this state of consciousness shades gradually into that of intellect, rationality, or the concrete mind. The shading is so gradual that it is impossible to make a neat division between the kamic and the lower manasic vehicles. They function together and constitute a unity which we call the sukshma sharira or astral soul. The lower manas is sometimes called kama-manas, which means literally “desire mind” and refers to the more concrete type of thought which is intertwined with desire. When we pass into the fifth state, we enter the domain of the spiritual Ego. The fifth state is characterized by the higher sort of thought process that we might call reason or abstract mind. It is intelligence as opposed to intellect. It is here


5 Some writers have used the term “astral body” to refer to the principle which HPB called Kama or Kama Rupa, the seat of the appetites and desires (see Appendix I). This need not cause confusion if we bear in mind the difference in terminology. In this presentation we have chosen to adopt HPB’s usage.
 
that the perfect memory of all experiences through all our lives is maintained. The sixth is that of buddhi—spiritual intuition or wisdom. It is the level of consciousness on which a person no longer says “I think,” but rather “I know.” The auric envelope contains and envelopes the entire person. It contains the karmic patterns which dictate the spiritual, psychic, and material structure of the subordinate principles.
It is important to realize that the denser the vehicle, the more robust are the impresssions of that plane. The more rarefied the vehicle, the more subtle and delicate are the impressions of that plane. Our consciousness is normally operating in all seven sheaths simultaneously, although one or the other may be the predominating center of activity at any one moment. As the impressions of the inner worlds are so very delicate and tenuous, the human economy has a built-in system of “psychic centers” or chakras 6 which, when active, serve as transformers, amplifying the impressions of these subtle levels of consciousness and making them available to the waking consciousness.
During sleep we experience interiorization of consciousness as it withdraws from the outer world. It is useful to think about the states of dreaming and sleeping to realize the nature of the inner planes. With each degree of separation in consciousness from the physical level, things become increasingly “all in the mind.” As one occultist has re- marked, on the inner planes thoughts are things and moods are places. Meditation on this concept is helpful in understanding the seven levels of human consciousness.
In ancient mythology, Sleep was the brother of Death. It has been mentioned that during sleep we experience an interiorization of consciousness. At the moment of “death” we experience a similar phenomenon. Death is a process involving the success- sive shedding of the perishable vehicles in which the spirit dwells. It is analogous to the discarding of one’s outworn clothing.
The death of the physical body releases the permanent entity, now clothed in astral form. In the ordinary course of nature, the disruption of the normal activities of the astral body, the beginning of its own death, precedes physical death. As a result the astral “dies” shortly thereafter and is left behind. The old, discarded astral vehicle is the wraith or phantom form occasionally seen hovering over graves in cemeteries. It event- ually disintegrates on its own plane just as the physical corpse does on its respective plane.
Once released from the astral body, the permanent entity is clothed in the astral soul and is now in the realm called purgatory in the Catholic religion, or Kama Loka (world of desire) by the mystics of the East. This is the world of unsatisfied passions and desires, the world of the selfish, personal self. It is here that the inner being must

6 The term “chakra” is a Sanskrit word meaning “wheel.” To the clairvoyant vision of ancient seers, the whirling vortices of these subtle energies suggested the idea of wheels of light—hence the designation chakra.
 
separate and become disentangled from the outer husk. This is not an easy process for it entails a great inner struggle. The final separation involves the separation of the lower manas into two separate sets of affinities. That portion of the lower manas which clings to the permanent spiritual being provides a subtle vesture which will clothe that being in the next stage of the journey; the portion that clings to the transitory earthly desires and appetites is discarded along with the dregs of the desire principle. The discarded astral soul or “shell” disintegrates slowly and fades out on its own plane. It is this “shell” which often appears at spiritualistic séances, masquerading as the “spirit” of the dear departed. Energized by vitality borrowed from a medium, it may  fool  many people in this way.
The spiritual individuality, clothed in the subtlest elements of the lower manas, now enters into a sublime state which in the East is called Devachan, a Tibetan word meaning “happy land.” This is a subjective “dream-state” where the disembodied Ego builds its own scenery. It is a sublimely happy state where all the deepest longings of the personal ego are realized. The Devachanic state is sometimes divided into two levels. These are known as the Rupa Loka and the Arupa Loka, the “world of form” and the “formless world.” The Devachanic state may last from a few to some thousands of years. It continues till all the spiritual or noble feelings and yearnings of the ego have reached their fruition. One of the purposes of this period of complete happiness and bliss is to assimilate the lessons learned during the past life on earth. The experiences of that life are reviewed and made to yield valuable lessons for the enduring entity.
After a period of time in Devachan, the Ego is ready for a new life in the lower worlds of matter and form. The biological reproductive process provides a new suit of mortal clothing, and at birth the individuality steps into the material world, once more ready to begin a new cycle on the wheel of birth and death.


Questions from Students
Q: You have described a human being as a divine “spark” clothed in seven sheaths. How does this nomenclature relate to what have been called the seven human “principles”?
A: The Theosophical teaching of the seven principles was given out by HPB over a number of years as her Masters permitted the release of more and more infor- mation. In Isis Unveiled a three-fold division was used: body, soul, and spirit. Later, A. P. Sinnett was permitted to outline, in his Esoteric Buddhism, a tentative seven-fold division of “principles” which was given to him in a series of letters from the Mahatmas. It was still not the real, complete division but was a close approximation, a convenient half-truth, which concealed certain things for which
 
people were not yet quite ready. But it provided a vocabulary and a basis for communication and was employed for the next few years by Theosophists in general and by HPB, who knew, of course, the real division but was not permitted to talk about it.
This division of the seven principles was as follows:

1.	Physical body, sthula sharira
2.	Prana, the vital force
3.	Astral body, linga sharira
4.	Kama
5.	Manas
6.	Buddhi
7.	Atma

The divine spark or Atma was included as the “seventh principle.” The two aspects of manas (the higher and lower) were lumped into one, the auric envelope was omitted entirely, and prana (the vital life force which animates living matter) was included. In the last years of her life, HPB gave to her pledged pupils the division of Atma and the seven sheaths which has been described previously. Buddhi was shown to have earlier served as a blind, concealing the mystery of the auric envelope—an aspect of the human constitution mentioned by HPB only to her esoteric students. Manas was shown clearly as consisting of two aspects belonging to two separate though intimately related planes of the universe.7 Prana was relegated to its proper place as a universal vitalizing force, carried in the blood, and closely related to the principle of Kama, or desire. An attentive reading of the E.S. instructions which are included in the twelfth vol- ume of H. P. Blavatsky’s Collected Writings will assist in understanding these points. A knowledge, however, of the old seven-fold division of principles used in Esoteric Buddhism is essential for an understanding of The Secret Doctrine and other Blavatsky writings, since it is used there. A perusal of Appendix I may be helpful in this regard.

Q: How are we to relate the traditional classification of body, soul, and spirit to the septenary division?



7 Technically, it is said that upon incarnation the Manasic Ego on the higher plane projects from itself a ray which clothes itself in the temporary form evolved from the material of the lower plane.
 
A: Again, it is largely semantics. You define certain things, attach certain labels, and go from there. There is very little consistency among writers. HPB, who never won any prizes for consistency, used the terms differently from time to time. But, in general, it is appropriate to define Atma, the Divine Spark which is one with the Logos or Paramatma, as the Spirit. Soul, then, would refer to the intermediate vestures which link the Spirit to the body. In this sense, then, Soul has several levels. The Buddhi (and implicitly the Auric Envelope) is often called the “spiritual soul.” Manas, in its higher and lower aspects, is the “human soul,” while the Kama or desire principle is the “animal soul.” We might even go one step further and call the astral body the “vegetative soul” as this is the most highly developed principle of the plant world. HPB called the “soul” the “double” and showed that it has several aspects. This is what she says:
In truth there is only one [double] under three aspects or phases: the most material portion disappearing with the body; the middle one surviving as an independent entity in the land of shadows; the third, immortal throughout the Manvantara, unless Nirvana puts an end to it before. (Collected Writings,     10: 219)

Q: It was stated that the period spent in Kama Loka is a time of great struggle. Is this always the case?
A: Not in the case of a pure and holy person who has not been attached during life to the appetites and desires. For such a one the stay in Kama Loka is character- ized by a dreamy unconsciousness from which he or she will awaken in Deva- chan. The Kama Rupa or body of desire is shaken off easily with no great struggle. But, alas, all too many of us are not so free from our passions.

Q: I have heard the word “earthbound.” What does this mean?
A: It may refer to several things. “When we die,” says the French occultist Eliphas Levi, “our souls must first of all get rid of the unpurified astral light which envelops and imprisons them” (Transcendental Magic, 153). Until the soul has done so, it is held captive within the astral envelope of the earth and becomes “earthbound.” In the case of extremely materialistic persons, this period of astral imprisonment may be quite lengthy. Other examples, which are very different, include accidental death, murder, or suicide. It was mentioned  that  under normal circumstances the wearing out of the astral double or Linga Sharira is responsible for the death of the physical body. In accidental death, murder, or suicide this doesn’t happen. The astral body is still well and active and the person, although snatched out of the physical shell, is not “dead” in the usual sense, but will remain bound to the earth’s atmosphere till the astral body has
 
lived out its allotted span. For good and unselfish victims,  this  earthbound period is spent in blissful state of unconsciousness. For those less pure, it is an unpleasant experience. For the suicide it will be a miserable period of “weeping and gnashing of teeth,” living in perpetual memory of the circumstances which led to the taking of his or her own life.

Q: I once read something in a Theosophical book about “lost souls.” What does that mean?
A: It is a sad fact of life that there are occasional persons who are so bound up in material things that there is nothing of the living personality worth taking with the Ego into Devachan. Nothing of the lower mental nature can be saved and the personality of that particular incarnation perishes completely. The life is a complete failure and the following Devachanic period is a blank. It has been compared to a page torn out of a book. The spiritual Ego goes on and quickly reincarnates, but the personality of the previous incarnation passes into a locality known as the “Eighth Sphere” where it is annihilated. An altogether different state is experienced by those whose intensely criminal natures disqualify them for the state of Devachan but whose potential spirituality prevents their utter annihilation as personalities. Such individuals are born into nightmarish astral states which, as the antithesis of Devachan, can only be called hells. The worst of these is Avitchi—an unremitting state of suffering. As the result of karma, these states finally come to an end when the causes that brought them about are finally exhausted and the monad takes birth once more. For the sake of completeness, we may state that obstinate persistence in life after life of unrepentant evil-doing eventually leads to even worse consequences that we will not discuss here. These are the real “lost souls.” The details of all these sad possibilities are given in The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett and Blavatsky’s E.S. Instructions (Collected Writings, 12:632-41).

Q: What is the point of experiencing Devachan if it is an illusion or a dream?
A: As well ask what is the point of sleeping and dreaming, since it is all either blankness or illusion. Devachan is a period of much needed rest for the spiritual Ego. It is a time for the digestion of the experience gained in the life that was and a preparation for the life that is to be.

Q: Is it possible to communicate with the dead?
A: The disembodied Egos in the Devachan cannot descend to earth. It is up to us to learn how we may ascend to the high spiritual level in which they dwell, and
 
such communion can indeed be practiced by those who know how to do so. It is said that during sleep all of us enjoy such communion with our loved ones who are in Devachan. However, we do not generally bring back to waking consciousness the memories of such experiences. Spiritualistic practices for attempted communication with the dead, on the other hand, should be avoided. Shells, earthbound spirits of various kinds, including suicides and the victims of accidental death as well as the mischievous elemental spirits, are all there within easy access of the medium. None of these can help the inquirer on this plane, nor can the inquirer be of any help to them. The occultist shuns spiritualistic intercourse with such entities, considering the practice as necromancy pure and simple.


 
REFERENCES FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING:
Besant, The Seven Principles of Man.
Blavatsky, Collected Writings, vol. 12. “E.S.T. Instructions.”
———. The Key to Theosophy, sections 6-11.


QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
1.	Why is a human being called the “Microcosm”?
2.	Why is it said that there is only one Atman in the Universe?
3.	This chapter postulates the higher and lower mind (manas). Explain how they differ in function, giving examples if possible.
4.	Can you conceive of something higher than the mind? Is it hard to think of subjective existence beyond the mind except as speculation? Does it have any meaning to you as something that is part of us here and now?
5.	What is the difference between the terms rupa and arupa? What planes do you think make up the arupa levels of a human being?
6.	Discuss the concepts of spirit, soul, and body in your own terms and what they mean to you.
7.	What part of the human being is permanent? What parts endure from one incarnation to the next? What parts are renewed with each incarnation?
8.	What is the role of the chakras in the constitution of the human being?
9.	Describe the stages that occur between the end of one human incarnation and the beginning of the next incarnation.
