Chapter 4
Evolution: The Law of Unfoldment

We have discussed the awakening of the Logos from its pralayic state of absorption within Parabrahm. We have mentioned the Divine Sons that spring forth within the Logos as the “Army of the Voice.” We have described the seven vehicles that clothe the Divine Sons, transforming them from Gods into humans. We can now discuss the pro- cess of involution and evolution by which the worlds and their kingdoms of life are formed. It is only by so doing that we can form an understanding of how the human “sheaths” have reached their present state as described in the preceding section.
The hosts of the Divine Sons—the “Scintillas” of the highest arupa (formless) realm—seek to fashion their reflections in the cosmic elements. As formless radiations, the Scintillas are not endowed with any similitude of the finite consciousness exper- ienced by the creatures of the manifested realms. Too pure to be distinct from the Universal Essence of which they are a part, they exist within the Logos with the same type of individuality characterizing a drop within an ocean of water. The Divine Scintillas can neither progress nor develop, as they represent perfection itself. They can only display in the world of space and time—in limitations of form and developmental sequence—the attributes which exist in them eternally.
The Divine Scintilla, cycling along its spiral path in eternity, overshadows with its light and consciousness the differentiated elements which will eventually become the seven sheaths. The hosts of monadic and atomic “lives” which will form the human principles must evolve through eons of experience in order that they might gain the degree of responsiveness and sensitivity required for the embodiment of the “Heavenly Man.” In the words of an esoteric commentary quoted in The Secret Doctrine:
Every form on earth, and every speck (atom) in Space strives in its efforts towards self-formation to follow the model placed for it in the “HEAVENLY MAN”. . . Its [the atom’s] involution and evolution, its external and internal growth and develop- ment, have all one and the same object—man; man, as the highest physical and ultimate form on this earth; the MONAD in its absolute totality and awakened condition—as the culmination of the divine incarnations on Earth. (1: 183)
The esoteric teachings divide the phases of the journey toward humanity into seven “kingdoms.” The first three are the kingdoms of the elementals. They are sometimes referred to as “nature spirits.” They are “semi-intelligent centres of force”—the “fairies,” “pixies,” “genii,” etc., of folklore. In their more material aspect they are the life of the winds, the rains, the fires, the waves, the earthquakes, etc. In occultism these are
 
not inanimate things but semi-intelligent beings or “lives” which constitute a link in the evolving chain of existences.
They are the Soul of the elements, the capricious forces in Nature, acting under one immutable Law inherent in these Centres of Force, with undeveloped consciousness and bodies of plastic mould . . . These beings have never been, but will in myriads of ages hence, be evolved into men. They belong to the three lower kingdoms, and pertain to the Mysteries on account of their dangerous nature. (Lucifer, August 1893: 541)
[They] occupy, as it were, a specific step in the ladder of being, and . . . may properly be called nature-spirits or cosmic agents of nature, each being confined to its own element and never transgressing the bounds of others . . . In the teach- ings of Eastern Kabalists, and of the Western Rosicrucians and Alchemists, they are spoken of as the creatures evolved in and from the four kingdoms of earth, air, fire, and water, and are respectively called gnomes, sylphs, salamanders, and undines . . . Under the general designation of fairies and fays, these spirits of the elements appear in the myths, fables, traditions, and poetry of all nations, ancient and modern. Their names are legion—peris, devs, djins, sylvans, satyrs, fauns, elves, dwarfs, trolls, norns, nisses, kobolds, brownies, necks, stromkars, undines, nixies, goblins, ponkes, banshees, kelpies, pixies, moss people, good people, good neighbors, wild women, men of peace, white ladies—and many more . . . We will adopt the term “Elemental” to designate only these nature-spirits . . . Elementals, as said already, have no form, and in describing what they are, it is better to say that they are “centres of force” having instinctive desires, but no consciousness as we understand it.” (Lucifer, September 1893: 30-31)
The fourth kingdom of life is the mineral kingdom. Far from being the dead, inert things that the profane imagine them to be, the minerals comprise a kingdom of slumbering life embodied in forms provided for them by the elementals which lag behind them in the evolutionary journey. As more and more complex forms develop, the current of life gives rise to the three higher kingdoms of evolution: the plants, animals, and finally humanity.
Cosmic and planetary evolution, therefore, is not a purely mechanical process but instead represents the creative activity of Cosmic Life. The fiery nebula that condenses to form a planet is vibrant with elemental and atomic life that will eventually give rise to plant, animal, and human life. As organic forms grow in complexity so that a highly developed nervous system and brain are evolved, the light of Atma becomes increase- ingly focalized in the organism. As forms develop from the simple and homogeneous to the complex and heterogeneous, the Divine Life can express itself more and more fully within these forms, unfolding its potentialities of consciousness and realization, thereby reflecting the majesty of Divine Thought in the evolving mirror of mortal mind. Finally,
 
humanity—the microcosmic reflection of the macrocosm—is formed and in this formation spirit and matter, heaven and earth, are indissolubly linked.
A Master has given the following summary of the evolution of the seven kingdoms:
Now the life impulse reaches . . . that which . . . so far is but cosmic dust. A centre is formed in the nebulous matter of the condensation of the solar dust dissemi- nated through space and a series of three evolutions invisible to the eye of flesh occur in succession, viz., three kingdoms of elementals or nature forces are evoluted: in other words the animal soul of the future globe is formed; or as a Kabalist will express it, the gnomes, the salamanders, and the undines are created. (The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, 184-185)
The three evolutions completed, palpable globe begins to form. The mineral kingdom fourth in the whole series, but first in this stage leads the way. Its deposits are at first vaporous, soft and plastic, only becoming hard and concrete in the seventh ring . . . At this juncture the evolution of the vegetable kingdom commences . . . When the latter has made its seventh ring . . . the germs of the animal kingdom enter . . . When the animal has seven rings . . . then comes man. Evolving seven parent races with many offshoots of sub-races, he, like the preceding kingdoms completes his seven rings. (Ibid., 185)
Long cycles in the lower kingdoms are required before the evolving cosmic essence acquires the responsiveness and sensitivity to reflect the image of the “Self-Existent Lord.” It is only at the later stages of the animal kingdom that the ocean of Buddhi- Manas (monadic essence) begins to break up into its constituent drops or individual monads. In the human kingdom, the monad begins its cycle of regular reincarnations under the quickening influence of the “Sons of Wisdom,” evolved entities from pre- ceding world cycles in whom the fires of self-consciousness burned brightly, and who were thus fit to light the fire of self-consciousness in humanity. From that time onward, it is no longer a pilgrimage of the Divine Life through varying stages of rudimentary consciousness, but a matter of countless individual human reincarnations in which the fully individualized monad gathers the fruits of self-conscious experience.
As human beings, we are especially concerned with the pilgrimage of the Divine Life as it travels through the human kingdom unfolding and expressing its transcen- dental powers. Theosophy teaches that the process of unfoldment occurs through a long series of rebirths or reincarnations. This refers to the repeated entry of the spiritual self into fleshly covering, its repeated embodiment on this and other worlds. We have estab- lished that a human being has four outer, perishable vehicles—mental, kamic, astral, and physical—with their organs of action and sensation. These are renewed with each incarnation.
The undying inner being that passes from life to life is the Eternal Pilgrim, the Atmic Ray with its Auric Envelope, Buddhi and Higher Manas. Life is a school of
 
experience for this inner Pilgrim. Emerging from the animal kingdom as a rudimentary and undeveloped human, the evolutionary journey in the human kingdom will carry  one from this primitive state to that of the fully enlightened and integrated individu- ality—and beyond. The Inner Self is an actor playing many roles who dwells in many personalities (the root-word persona means “mask”) and takes forward from each the experiences gathered. As we live we produce causes that must react upon us in the future for good or bad. This is called karma, the law of cause and effect by which we reap the effects of the actions we sow—either in this or in some future life. Karma from the past determines the type of body our Ego receives, our environment, and the things which happen to us.
The goal of evolution is to master life, to become people who know who we are and where we are going. Such people know exactly what they are doing. They see clearly, understanding themselves and conditions around them. Filled with compassion for less progressed beings, they help others learn who they are in the deepest meaning of these words. Such people help others find, as they themselves have found, their true spiritual identity. For all that, one can only point the way to others since all must find the way and become the way for themselves.
There are seven stages or “rounds” of human unfoldment which correspond to the development of the seven sheaths:

1.	The first stage is that of pure mechanical being. One at this level lives and that’s about all.
2.	At the second stage the person is wrapped up in and fascinated by things perceived.
3.	At the third stage one is wrapped up in the emotions and desires aroused by sensations, and seeks out more and more experience.
4.	At the fourth stage the person has developed intellect by which to plot ways to gain the objects of desire.
5.	At this stage spiritual intelligence begins to dawn. One begins to realize that there is more to life than formerly believed. Thought becomes more abstracted and not confined to gratifying self. It begins to be concerned with understanding things, and senses deeper levels of consciousness within.
6.	At this stage intuition, wisdom, and the sense of oneness grounded in all- embracing love become the person’s natural state. Knowledge arises spontaneously from within.
7.	At this stage one has become a fully enlightened soul with no more lessons to learn on this earth.
 
The final goal of human evolution is to become more than human. It is the self- realization of the Divine. From each of the personalities which it informs, the monad extracts the essence—those thoughts and aspirations which are capable of adding to its stock of cosmic experience. When it has assimilated the experiences of the successive personalities; when it has overcome the passions and desires which bound it to the wheel of birth and death; when it has learned to maintain a continuous, self-conscious existence in spirit; the monad then becomes a “Dhyan Chohan” or “Planetary Spirit.” Its evolution is now a matter of attaining consciousness on higher and higher planes of cosmic consciousness. New worlds open and consciousness unfolds on levels which are as the overtones, as it were, of the seven planes of terrestrial consciousness. Builders, Planetary Spirits, Lipika—these are but a few of the names assigned to some of the innumerable classes of Dhyan Chohans (literally, Lords of Meditation) evolving in higher worlds of conscious life—realms greater, more vast, more all-encompassing than can be imagined by the greatest and most holy saint on this speck of mud called earth.


Questions from Students
Q: It is not clear to me in reading HPB what is meant by the term monad. Could you elaborate on this?
A: It would have been easier for all of us if HPB had not borrowed the word monad from Leibnitz and had made up some term of her own to put across her ideas. The German mathematician Leibnitz used the word monad to refer to a spiritual unit, an indivisible point. But as HPB said, “What are called collectively Monads by Leibnitz . . . may be separated into three distinct Hosts”(The Secret Doctrine, 1:632). These she calls “gods,” “elementals or monads,” and “atoms.” The “gods” answer to what we have been calling the Divine Scintillas, the rays of the Logos. The second category is that of the elementals or monads (same word but a new meaning now) or the “atomic souls,” the lives” which make up the “anima mundi” or “world soul.” These are supposed to be like countless tiny mirrors, each reflecting every other. Collectively, vivified by the light shining from the “gods,” they are called by HPB the monadic or cosmic essence. The third category consists of atoms, material units which make up more differentiated matter.
Regarding the “gods” Blavatsky writes, “It stands to reason that a monad cannot either progress or develop, or even be affected by the changes of states it passes through. It is not of this world or plane, and may be compared only to an indestructible star of divine light and fire, thrown down onto our earth as a plank of salvation for the personalities in which it indwells”(Ibid., 1:174-75).
 
“Atma,” she writes in another place, “neither progresses, forgets, nor remem- bers. It does not belong to this plane; it is but the ray of light eternal which shines upon and through the darkness of matter—when the latter is willing”(Ibid., 1:244).
But Atma can act only through cosmic matter in its various states of differenti- ation as atoms and monads (the universal mirrors). “Now the Monadic [or rather Cosmic] Essence . . . in the mineral, vegetable, and animal, though the same throughout the series of cycles . . . yet differs in the scale of progression . . . The Ocean [of matter] does not divide  into its potential and constituent drops until the sweep of the life-impulse reaches the evolutionary stage of man-birth. The tendency towards segregation into individual monads is gradual, and in the higher animals comes almost to the point”(Ibid., 1:178).
In humanity, with the formation of a permanent, reincarnating entity, “the Formless (Arupa) Radiations . . . unite together an infinitude of monads—and thus individualize for the time being an independent mind, omniscient and universal; and by the same process of magnetic aggregation they create for themselves visible bodies out of the interstellar atoms”(Ibid., 1:632-33). At this point we have yet another use of the same word monad. Now, the first kind of monad (the god or divine spark) forms itself a vehicle composed of the second kind of monads (the universal mirrors), and together the spark and its vehicle constitute yet another kind of monad which passes from one human incarnation to the next. Thus the human monad is the unified triad (Atma; Buddhi, conceal- ing the mystery of the auric envelope; and Manas) or, when it is desired to distinguish between the Ego or “thinking principle” and the monad proper, it is Atma-Buddhi alone. I’m sorry if this seems confusing; it is confusing since one word is being used in so many different ways.

Q: I have read in several Theosophical books about group souls. What is the meaning of this term?
A: You cannot rely on the description of group souls in some of the literature. The basic idea is sound, but it has been rather badly materialized by certain writers. The fundamental meaning is simply that the lower kingdoms of life are not inhabited by individualized, reincarnating Egos as is the human kingdom. The stream of consciousness passing through the early phases of experience over- shadows a multitude of mineral, plant, or lower animal forms, as the case may be. The death of an organism in one of the lower kingdoms has been compared to pouring a cup of water back into the vessel from which it was originally taken. The experience acquired by a particular organism goes then to enrich the entire
 
“group soul.” This latter is composed of monadic lives or universal, mirror-like “soul-atoms” which have not yet reached the stage of individualization in the human kingdom.

Q: Are we to understand this process as continually occurring? Are new human monads continuously passing out of the lower kingdoms and starting  their  cycles of reincarnation?
A: Not any longer, evidently. It is said that several million years ago the “door” to the human kingdom was closed and since that time no new recruits have entered the human evolution. It is like registration for a class in school. Up until a certain time registration is carried on actively, but once the class has filled, registration must stop so that the work of learning can actually begin in earnest. If new stragglers were continuously coming in, the class as a whole could never get anywhere. It is the same with the transition between kingdoms. There are exceptions, however, here as everywhere else. It is said that the monads of the apes will gradually become human. This is because the apes as a whole are a special case. They are the offspring of the sexual indiscretion of the early human races and thus they are handled differently by nature. We will come back to that topic later.

Q: Could you then summarize, “in twenty words or less,” the process of evolution through the lower kingdoms and up through humanity?
A: I don’t know if we can get it down to twenty words or less, but HPB gave a very nice description when she wrote the following words:
At the beginning of every Manvantara [life cycle] the natural tendency of every Deva [god] is manward. A Deva drops its essence into the body of a planet and becomes a stone; from the rocky womb, it creeps into the moss and plant; thence Karma carries it into an animal, and there it remains until united with Alaya’s light, after which the animal blooms into thinking man. It is the latter who furnishes every new Manvantara with intelligent and  wise architects and builders. (Lucifer, February 1891: 455)


 
REFERENCES FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING:
Blavatsky, Collected Writings, vol. 5 “About the Mineral Monad.”
———. The Secret Doctrine, 1: 610-634 “God, Monads, and Atoms.”


QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
1.	What is meant by the term evolution?
2.	Through the process of evolution, what is it that becomes able to achieve a sharper focus in the physical body, especially in the human being?
3.	What is the goal of reincarnation?
4.	What part does karma play in evolution?
5.	Is there an “end” to evolution? If so, what is it?
6.	What does HPB’s teaching about the monad add to your understanding of our human constitution? Do you find her statements helpful or confusing?
7.	What is your concept of a Dhyan Chohan?
