Chapter 5
Macrocosm

The cosmology of The Secret Doctrine carries us back to that time when the universe was not yet born. The forms of the preceding manvantara had been dissolved; in their state of dissolution, they rested within the bosom of Mulaprakriti. When the long pralaya had run its course, Mulaprakriti once again began to differentiate and the universe emerged from the state of latency in which it had remained for incalculable aeons.
This emerging universe is dual, consisting on the one side of cosmic substance, or prakriti, and on the other side of cosmic ideation, or purusha—the vivifying Logos with its constituent hosts of active radiations. During the state of pralaya these two aspects are merged together. At the dawn of the new manvantara they separate from one another, the successive differentiations of Mulaprakriti providing the illusive shadows required to set off and make manifest the light of the Logos.
The Wisdom Religion describes three preliminary stages of cosmic unfoldment by which the emergence of the universe occurs, and these stages are symbolized in the old teachings by geometrical figures. The basis of these symbols is a white disk O in a field of darkness. The white disk symbolizes Mulaprakriti with consciousness lying asleep within it during the cosmic night. The field of darkness represents the ever-unknowable Parabrahm.
The first germ of differentiation is represented by the point within the circle ◉. From the form side of things, it is the first stage of differentiation by which root-matter
(Mulaprakriti) becomes cosmic matter (prakriti). From the life side of things, it is the “germ of mind”—the bare potentiality of manifested consciousness.
The second stage of primordial unfoldment is symbolized by the diameter drawn horizontally across the circle Ө. The veil of cosmic matter is becoming more different- tiated and now represents “an immaculate mother-nature within the all-embracing infinitude.” Divine Mind is able to manifest in a more concrete form and is now “Universal (latent) Ideation.” It is the “concealed father in the womb of the mother” and contains in their barest potentiality the seven hosts of celestial Intelligences, which exist—like the seven colors of the spectrum—concealed within the white radiance of the Eternal Light.
The third stage of pre-cosmic evolution is symbolically represented by a cross within the circle . Cosmic matter has reached that stage of differentiation (cosmic matter in its third stage of manifestation is called Maha Buddhi) in which the concealed
 
Divine Mind becomes active Cosmic Intelligence. The vertical line represents this active Intelligence which, as the male element in primordial nature, is born at this stage as the Son—the awakened cosmic mind or Mahat. These three primordial stages of evolution are called the three Logoi or, more correctly, the one Logos in its three hypostases or natures.
Springing up within Mahat are the seven hosts of celestial Intelligences (Ah-hi) who are said to “contain” Divine Mind and give it its vehicle for manifestation. The hosts of Mahat are the Sparks (Scintillas) from the Divine Flame which have been described previously as the “Army of the Voice,” the “Intelligent Forces that give to and enact in Nature her ‘laws.’” The seven hosts are sometimes referred to as seven “Rays” which emanate from the Central Spiritual Sun. Together with the Logos in its triple hypostasis, they constitute the Sacred Ten of Pythagorean and Kabbalistic lore. In the Judeo- Christian tradition they are the “seven spirits before the throne of God,” each of which is symbolized by a great Archangel. In Tibetan esotericism they are symbolized by the “Dhyani Buddhas”—each of which is the symbolic archetype of a particular aspect of the Divine Wisdom. In explaining this teaching Lama Anagarika Govinda writes:
The forms in which the Dhyani Buddhas appear . . . have been compared by us with the different colors into which the rays of the sun are separated, when passing through a prism, thus revealing in each color a particular quality of the light. This comparison is all the more adequate, as colors play an important role in the appearances of the Dhyani Buddhas. Their colors indicate certain properties and spiritual associations, which to the initiate are as significant and meaningful as notes to the musically trained. They convey the particular vibration, characteristic for each aspect of transcendental knowledge or Wisdom, which in the realm of sound is expressed by the corresponding vibration of the mantra, in the realm of corporeality by the corresponding gesture or mudrā, and in the innermost realm by the corresponding spiritual attitude. (Foundations of Tibetan Mysticism, pp. 115-16)
Each of the Primordial Seven is called in esoteric teaching a “Tanmātra,” the spiritual prototype of a particular cosmic element. HPB wrote, “The Tanmātras are literally the type or rudiment of an element devoid of qualities; but esoterically, they are the primordial noumena of that which becomes in the progress of evolution a Cosmic element in the sense given to the term in antiquity, not in that of physics. They are the Logoi, the seven emanations or rays of the Logos” (The Secret Doctrine, 1:572n).
Simultaneously with the emergence of the seven “rays” of the Logos and their constituent hosts, primordial matter issues forth as the seven “elements,” which in the East are called tattvas. Each element is “ruled” by one or the other of the seven “rays.” The tattvas may be enumerated as follows:
 
1.	Adi tattva—the “first” or primordial element
2.	Anupadaka tattva—the “parentless”
3.	Akasa tattva—the Pater-Aether of the Greeks
4.	Vayu tattva—etherial or gaseous state or element
5.	Tejas tattva—fiery or radiant element
6.	Apas tattva—watery, liquid, fluidic element
7.	Prithivi tattva— earthly element (physical matter and energy)

These are the seven rudimentary elements in their purest and most sublimated   form. It is these elements that will give rise, after innumerable differentiations, to the seven human sheaths, each of which is the heir to the powers of one of the great cosmic elements and to the “Ray” of Divine Wisdom which stands behind it. In his book The Inner Life, Charles Leadbeater quotes T. Subba Row, who explains the relationship between the tanmātras and the tattvas:
The tanmātra is the modification in the consciousness of the Logos, and the tattva is the effect produced in matter by that modification. You have seen how on a sandy shore a little wave comes quietly in, runs up on the sand and retires. But it has left behind it a tiny ridge to mark its limit. If the tide is rising, the next wave which comes in goes a little further up the beach, makes its mark in turn and  then retires. You may think of the tanmātra as imaged by the wave, which is the temporary modification of the ocean, and you may think of the little ridge made in the sand and symbolizing the tattva. (The Inner Life, 2: 176)
Like seven rays of different colors spiraling outward from a central point, the seven tattvas, or elements, become coarser with every turn (see Figure 2 on the next page). As the wave of cosmic differentiation sweeps outward in its cyclic gyrations, each element becomes less and less spiritual while at the same time acquiring more and more material characteristics. At the same time, the divine emanations, which shoot forth like tongues of fire from the macrocosmic center, gradually clothe themselves in the elements. Thus, after innumerable turns, are formed the seven great “planes” of the universe, each of which may be again and again subdivided. These are the “seven shells surrounding Brahma’s egg” described in the Puranas under a veil of theological blinds.
The ancient Stanzas of Dzyan, on which The Secret Doctrine is based, describes the formation of the universal planes in the following way:
Father-Mother spin a web whose upper end is fastened to spirit—the light of the one darkness—and the lower one to its shadowy end, matter; and this web is the
 
universe spun out of the two substances made in one, which is Svabhavat. (The Secret Doctrine, 1: 29)




This is what has been described as the great keyboard of cosmic substance. To explain the seven planes of the universe is impossible. It is said that the highest beings in our solar system are in ignorance as to what exists on the second septenary plane. The lowest of these seven cosmic planes contains the seven planes of the solar systems (see Figure 3).
 

 
 
HPB gives the following names for the seven solar planes: (Collected Writings, 12:658).

7. Auric
6. Alayic
5. Mahatic
4. Fohatic
3. Jivic
2. Astral
1. Prakritic

The six higher solar planes are accessible only to the adepts. It is said that the consciousness of a Pratyeka Buddha (one who reaches the wisdom of a Buddha but who does not help others to reach that state) can reach as far as the third solar plane (the Jivic) while only a Buddha of Compassion (one who renounces the attainment of nir- vana in order to help others attain Buddhahood) can penetrate beyond. These planes  are the habitation of the heavenly hosts of our solar system.
It is on the lowest four subdivisions of the prakritic plane that the planets bearing humanity exist. Our Earth and the other visible planets, which belong to the same layer of differentiated matter, are on the most material of these subdivisions. It is at this level of existence at the periphery of being that we live in our material bodies and pursue our terrestrial occupations.


Questions from Students
Q. How do the Theosophical teachings relate to modern scientific theories of cosmology, i.e., the “big bang,” etc.?
A. There are many aspects of modern cosmological theory that remind one of The Secret Doctrine. One theory, for example, depicts the universe as cyclically expanding and contracting. At present we are believed to be in an expansive phase; all the galaxies appear to be moving away from one another at tremendous velocities. If the cyclic theory is correct, the situation will one day reverse itself and the galaxies will all begin to move together once more, until all the energy in the universe is compressed into a state of incredible density from which it will “explode” once again to form galaxies, stars, etc. In many ways this resembles the account given in the Stanzas of Dzyan:
 
The mother swells, expanding from within without, like the bud of the lotus
. . . the luminous egg . . . curdles and spreads in milk-white curds through- out the depths of mother . . . the sons dissociate and scatter, to return into   the mother’s bosom at the end of the great day, and re-become one with her. (The Secret Doctrine, 1: 28-30)
Another interesting point in the scientific theory is that the “expansion of the universe” is not to be thought of as proceeding from any particular point in our space and then moving outward. An  observer in a one galaxy sees the same thing as an observer in any other galaxy. An analogy which has been used to make this clearer is that of a balloon being inflated. If the balloon is covered with spots, the view from any one spot will be such that all the other spots appear to be moving away from it. There is no unique point on the balloon’s surface from which the expansion began. Therefore, the space of our universe may be com- pared to the surface of the balloon with the galaxies corresponding to the spots on the balloon. The surface of the balloon is finite since it has a definite surface area at any given time. Yet at the same time it is boundless—it is not closed in by any boundaries. Just as the two dimensions of the surface of the balloon are curved around into a third dimension,  the three dimensions of our “extension” are believed to be curved around into a fourth dimension. This is not a dimen- sion of extension, as we understand it, but is best thought of as a mathematical abstraction which may be visualized as a fourth quantity specifying a particular event. Thus our three-dimensional space may be, like the surface of a sphere, “finite but unbounded.”
Now let us see what HPB says in The Secret Doctrine. Speaking of a sphere or circle as an ancient mystical symbol she says:
Though the idea per se is, of course, an abstraction, a symbolical mode of expression, it is a symbol truly, as it suggests the idea of infinity as an endless circle. It brings before the mind’s eye the picture of Cosmos emerging from and in boundless space, a Universe as shoreless in magnitude if not as endless in its objective manifestation. The simile of an egg also expresses the fact taught in Occultism that the primordial form of everything manifested, from atom to globe, from man to angel, is spheroidal, the sphere having been with all nations the emblem of eternity and infinity. (The Secret Doctrine, 1: 65)
The phrase “as shoreless in magnitude if not as endless in its objective manifestation” is most suggestive in relation to the idea of a “finite yet bound- less” universe as postulated in modern cosmology. Interestingly enough, this
 
idea was promulgated by Albert Einstein who actually studied The Secret Doctrine! 8 Even more striking is the following quotation:
There is but one indivisible and absolute Omniscience and Intelligence in the Universe, and this thrills throughout every atom and infinitesimal point of the whole finite Kosmos which hath no bounds, and which people call SPACE. (Ibid., 1: 277)

Q: I am not sure how to relate your description of the universal planes with other things I have read. I thought that our “bodies” were derived one by one from the successive planes of the solar system.
A: It all depends on what you mean by a plane. A human has various sheaths or “bodies.” Each of these sheaths comes from a particular element, or “plane.” But each of these elements or planes has its own scale of manifestation from the lowest to the highest, or from the periphery to the center of the hyper-spherical universe just described (see also Figure 2). The planes described in this chapter relate to this latter meaning.
To use an analogy, if we begin at the lowest register of the piano keyboard and play a melody there, we can call that melody our world or plane. Its various notes represent the seven principles ranging from material to spiritual. Now we can go an octave higher on the keyboard and play the same tune there. This represents a higher “plane” on which planets invisible to our senses can exist coexistent with our world or plane. There really are such planets on such higher planes, and we will talk about that in the next section. And so we may go on up the scale of vibration, repeating the process till we reach levels which are beyond such things as planets and the like.
HPB does not discuss what lies beyond the fourth plane of prakriti.  She simply calls it the “Divine and Formless World of Spirit.” But, as she says, “the seven states of human consciousness pertain to quite another question.” Evidentally, the seven solar planes contain a great deal more than some of the elementary books would lead you to believe. At the risk of confusing you more, I might as well go one step further by telling you that when HPB uses the word “solar,” she oftentimes means more than the system which surrounds our visible sun. The highest Dhyan Chohans and Intelligences associated with our visible sun and its system are on a comparatively low plane relative to the greater solar system of which it is a part.


8 “Reminiscences of Lomaland: Madame Tingley and the Theosophical Institute in San Diego” by Iverson Harris. Published in The Journal of San Diego History, (Summer 1974).
 
Q: Could you comment further on the seven tattvas or elements?
A: The exoteric Hindu classification of elements includes five: akasa (ether), vayu (air), tejas (fire), apas (water), and prithivi (earth). To these the esoteric philosophy adds two more to make up the total seven. Adi and Anupadaka are the names of the two highest tattvas or elements. As adjectives, they mean “the first” and “the parentless,” respectively. It is said that each tattva is presided over by a partic- ular tanmātra or Logoic keynote, although it contains the other six keynotes as well. Thus prithivi tattva is composed of vibratory energies which reflect the natures of all seven rays of the Logos, but it is dominated by the one that is the presiding influence of the physical world. Similarly, apas tattva has energies belonging to all the tanmātras, but the presiding tanmātra is different from that  of the physical world. Each of the tattvas gives rise to one of the seven human sheaths. Each corresponds to a musical note, a color, a planet, a “Ray” of Divine Wisdom and to a thousand other things.

Q:  Does the relationship of elements to sounds and colors correspond to the series of notes along the piano keyboard, or the colors of the spectrum from red to violet?
A: Not in the order you might suppose. The order of these things as we perceive them on earth is a kind of illusion, or maya. This order changes on the various planes (see Appendix III) and it is a very complex subject, the complete story of which cannot be divulged as it would reveal the key to the production of magical phenomena for which the world is not yet ready. All that can be said about this subject is contained in Blavatsky’s E.S. Instructions, which are included in the twelfth volume of her Collected Writings. If you are interested in pursuing the subject, there you can find as much as can be told. You will also find a great deal of information about the septenary division of the planets and the solar system. But the information is fragmentary and in the form of notes, so you will have to use your intuition to try to understand it.

Q: I have read before about the First, Second, and Third Logoi. Aren’t they supposed to be the Will, Wisdom, and Activity of the Solar Logos?
A: As mentioned in an earlier section, a great deal of rather misleading information has been presented in trying to describe the “Solar Logos,” its “aspects,” and its “outpourings.” In reading some of these descriptions, one may well recall a Master’s words in speaking to an early Theosophist who was unable to shake off his conditioned belief in a personal God. “Must I repeat again,” wrote the Mahat- ma, “that the best Adepts have searched the Universe during millenniums and
 
found nowhere the slightest trace of such a Machiavellian schemer—but throughout, the same immutable, inexorable law. You must excuse me if I positively decline to lose my time over such childish speculations” (The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, p. 283). An attempt to theosophize the “Lord God” of theology and set him up again in occult disguise is unwarranted. The three Logoi of which HPB spoke is the One Logos of the Universe in its three stages of emergence from the unknown darkness of Parabrahm:
There seems to be great confusion and misunderstanding concerning the First and Second Logos. The first is the already present yet still unmanifested potentiality in the bosom of Father-Mother; the second is the abstract collec- tivity of creators called “Demiurgi” by the Greeks or the Builders of the Universe. The third logos is the ultimate differentiation of the second and the individualization of Cosmic Forces, of which Fohat is the chief; for Fohat is the synthesis of the Seven Creative Rays or Dhyan Chohans which proceed from the third Logos. (Transactions of the Blavatsky Lodge, p. 33)

Q: Should we accept H. P. Blavatsky as an infallible authority?
A: Absolutely not. This issue was addressed by I. K. Taimni with great clarity:
The Eternal Wisdom is a transcendent Reality which cannot be poured into a mould, preserved and then worshipped as a fetish . . . The moment its expression becomes static and is treated as a creed, to be studied religiously and followed piously, it has really become dead . . . To treat the Occult doc- trines discussed in The Secret Doctrine as a creed and to consider what has been said in it with regard to various matters as the last word on the subject is therefore really a betrayal of the Eternal Wisdom which the book was meant to partially unveil. Let us understand this fact thoroughly . . . if we want to preserve the freshness and dynamic nature of the Wisdom which was sought to be partially revealed. (Man, God, and the Universe, pp. 379-80)
But there is another side to the question. We have to remember that the modern Theosophical movement owes its very existence to H. P. Blavatsky and the Masters, whose faithful agent she claimed to be. It would be extremely unwise to reject the teachings given through her without understanding what those teachings really were in the first place. And how can we acquire this understanding if we do not study her writings? We don’t have to blindly accept what she says or take her views as the last word, but at least we should become familiar with those views firsthand. Then we can reject or accept intelligently. When the works of other and later writers who claim to be continuing the work begun by Blavatsky present viewpoints and “revelations” which are at direct variance with the original lines of teaching, we may feel justified in questioning
 
the source of the newer pronouncements. A familiarity with the original writings, therefore, provides a criterion for intelligent judgment.

Q: But Blavatsky’s writings are so hard to read.
A: They are indeed. Often students have a difficult time because they try to read Blavatsky in a vacuum. They have never heard of the various schools of Oriental philosophy, they have never read the Greek classics, and the ideas of Spinoza and Leibnitz, Descartes and Newton are unfamiliar to them. They know next to nothing of the traditions of the Kabbala, magic, and alchemy. Such students are apt to be bewildered by HPB’s style, which scrambles all these together, seasons the mixture with the precious truths of the most profound  esotericism,  and serves it to the student as a syncretic curry which is as apt to irritate serious scholars as to flabbergast the less hearty. Nevertheless, there is method in her madness, and perseverance pays off. Scattered throughout her many writings are innumerable signposts pointing to the highest truths. The following ideas, taken from Robert Bowen’s notes made from conversations with HPB, may be helpful:
It is worse than useless going to those whom we imagine to be advanced students (she said) and asking them to give us an “interpretation” of the S.D. They cannot do it. If they try, all they give are cut and dried exoteric renderings which do not remotely resemble the TRUTH. To accept such interpretation means anchoring ourselves to fixed ideas, whereas TRUTH lies beyond any ideas we can formulate or express . . .
Come to the S.D. (she says) without any hope of getting the final Truth of existence from it, or with any idea other than seeing how far it may lead TOWARDS the TRUTH. See in study a means of exercising and developing the mind never touched on by other studies . . . (Madame Blavatsky on How to Study Theosophy, pp. 8-9)
This mode of thinking (she says) is what the Indians call Jnana Yoga. As one progresses in Jnana Yoga, one finds conceptions arising which, though one is conscious of them, one cannot express nor yet formulate into any sort of men- tal pictures. As time goes on these conceptions will form into mental pictures. This is a time to be on guard and refuse to be deluded with the idea that the new found and wonderful picture must represent reality. It does not. As one works on, one finds the once admired picture growing dull and unsatisfying, and finally fading out or being thrown away. This is another danger point, because for the moment one is left in a void without any conception to sup- port one, and one may be tempted to revive the cast-off picture for want of a better to cling to. The true student will, however, work on unconcerned, and presently further formless gleams come, which again in time give rise to a larger and more beautiful picture than the last. But the learner will now know
 
that no picture will ever represent the TRUTH. This last splendid picture will grow dull and fade like the others. And so the process goes on, until at last the mind and its pictures are transcended and the learner enters and dwells in the World of NO FORM, but of which all forms are narrowed reflections.
The True Student of The Secret Doctrine is a Jnana Yogi, and this Path of Yoga is the True Path for the Western student. It is to provide him with signposts  on that Path that The Secret Doctrine has been written. (Ibid., 12-13)



 
REFERENCES FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING:
Blavatsky, Collected Writings, vol. 12. “E.S.T. Instruction IV.”
———. Transactions of the Blavatsky Lodge.


QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
1.	In this chapter is a list of the seven solar planes. It contains the word astral, used again in an entirely different way by HPB. How do you think she is using that word when she says that the planets of the solar system exist on the seventh or Prakritic plane?
2.	Why is active cosmic mind awakened only at the third stage?
3.	What is meant by a plane of consciousness?
4.	Why is it important to refuse to become too tightly anchored to a mental picture of the Cosmos?
5.	The following words were introduced in the past three chapters. Match the words in column A with the definitions in column B.

A	B
Manvantara	Mind.
Monad	A wheel of energy connecting the sheaths, so they can interact.
Manas	An energy structure or body which surrounds and penetrates the physical body and allows an interchange of prana, or vital energy.
Rupa	Desire, emotion, instinct.
Linga sharira	Possessing the ability to take a form or shape, or already
having a shape.
Chakra	The process by which spirit/matter gradually involves itself in creation by slowly densifying matter.
Involution	The period in which there is manifestation of life cycles.
Kama	Universal Mind.
Mahat	Defined as “single unit.” Can refer to Atma; also often used to mean “Atma-Buddhi, and in many writings refers to Atma-Buddhi-Manas.
