Chapter 6
The Scope of Planetary Evolution

It has been mentioned that the planets of our solar system exist on the four lower subdivisions of the prakritic plane of the solar cosmos. It is on the lowest of these four that our visible and tangible Earth exists. The occult teaching asserts that the evolution of the Earth is linked with that of six other planets which are found on the three planes above the lowest prakritic plane. These six invisible worlds plus our visible Earth make a total of seven globes which collectively constitute what is called a “planetary chain.” Every planetary chain in our solar system is a septenary unit consisting of seven globes and each of the visible planets that circle the sun is the coarsest and most material member of such a seven-fold chain of globes.



It is said that the impulse of life—the wave of evolution—moves gradually around this chain of worlds, inhabiting one globe for a period of time and then moving on to another where it continues its evolutionary journey. The first globe to be inhabited is shown as globe A in the diagram above. After spending a long period of time on that world, the life-wave with its constituent monads moves on to another world, the globe labeled B. And so the process continues by way of globe C until the life-wave has arrived at the most material of the seven, globe D, or our Earth.
As the wave of cosmic life sweeps downward through the globes, the seven human sheaths and the tattvas, or elements to which they belong, become more and more differentiated and acquire more material characteristics. Thus on the terrestrial plane, that of globe D, all the elements take on terrestrial aspects which will be left behind as the life-wave moves on to the next globe (E). When the life-wave finally reaches globe
 
G, it has returned to that level on which it began its aeonic cycle of planetary activity. This cyclical motion from the first to the seventh globe is called one “round.” It has carried the wave of life with its seven kingdoms from the highest to the lowest world and back again. We are taught that seven rounds or circuits of the planetary chain constitute the complete life cycle of our chain of worlds. 9 In each round up to the fourth, the same general evolution is carried out in successively more concrete stages. During the last three rounds life becomes more and more spiritual. Our life-wave is  now in its fourth round, occupying the fourth globe (D) of the chain, and thus it is approximately halfway through its long evolutionary journey.
A question arises at this point: “What becomes of the life-wave when the seven rounds are completed?” Occult science answers by explaining that planetary chains,  like human beings and everything else in nature, are governed by the cyclic law of death and rebirth. An active period is succeeded by a passive, resting period, followed again by another active period, and so on throughout eternity. Thus planetary chains  are reborn after a period of rest, and the various monads constituting the life-wave continue to carry on their evolution on a new chain. In fact, the occult doctrine teaches that the Moon is the remnant of the fourth globe of a planetary chain that preceded ours. Each of the seven globes of our chain has such a satellite which is presently in the process of disintegration—a corpse, truly, as the life which once animated it has moved on to a more perfect and higher chain—our Earth chain. Many millions of years from now, after our chain has finished its seven rounds, the globes now constituting our chain of worlds will become “moons” of the seven new globes which will be built by the reimbodying life wave.
According to occult teachings, the monads evolving on the planetary chain after passing over from the old scene of evolution—the lunar chain—are divided into seven classes.10 Of these seven, the first is that which we call the Lunar Pitris or Fathers. The Lunar Pitris lead the other monadic classes into incarnation. They do this by passing themselves in the first round through the seven kingdoms of planetary life. In this way they actually build from within the forms of the various kingdoms before turning them over to the less progressed classes of monads.11 They do this on each globe of the chain in the first round.
A certain group of the Lunar Pitris remains in human form on each globe as a “seed” for new human life in the next round. In this capacity they are known as the



9 With successive rounds the human monads pass through the seven stages of evolution described in Chapter Four.
10 See Appendix II.
11 Thus at the end of the life cycle on each planet, each class of monads has worked through the various kingdoms up to the terminal states shown in the table in Appendix II.
 
Sishta or “remainders.” They continue to act in this way in each round, remaining as a seed for new human life when the life-wave returns to a particular globe.
After the first round, these “Builders” (Lunar Pitris) need no longer traverse the lower kingdoms, the prototypes of the forms having already been built and needing only to develop and expand in future cycles.
The monads of the next three classes are those which reach the human stage during the first three and a half rounds, at the end of which time the “door into the human kingdom” is closed for the duration of the planetary manvantara. The monadic essence of the three other classes pursues its evolution in the animal, plant, and mineral worlds throughout the rest of this cycle.12
In addition to the seven classes of “lunar monads” who moved over to the Earth chain when the Moon chain reached the end of its life cycle, there are higher Dhyan Chohans who are active in the evolution of our world. One of these classes is the Solar Pitris, otherwise called the Kumaras, Agnishvattas, Lords of the Flame, Manasaputras, Asuras, and “Sons of Wisdom.” These are progressed entities of long-forgotten evolutions. They are the “fallen angels” who endow our humanity with the fire of real intelligence and self-consciousness. It is they who bring the light of self-conscious mind to our humanity. In a very special sense, they are our own Higher Egos, our “Holy Guardian Angels.”
The highest Dhyan Chohans associated with the development of our chain are known as the Sons of Will and Yoga. These great beings incarnated millions of years ago on our planet. The bodies in which they incarnated were created by mind-power, that mysterious power called Kriyasakti in the East. Their Chief, often called the Great Sacrifice or the One Initiator, is the Supreme Lord of evolution on earth.
As they pass from globe to globe within a given chain, the wave of human monads has to work through seven great periods of evolution called “root races” before passing on to the next globe.13 Each of these “root races” is subdivided into numerous sub-races and branch races. Each monad has to pass through all of these stages, acquiring experi- ence in every realm of human life. Each root race differentiates from the previous race, develops along its own line, gives birth to the next race, gets old, and slowly dies. In



12 See Appendix II for the progress of the monads round by round. In the present study manual, the author has followed the scheme outlined in Theosophical Gleanings by “Two Students of the E.S.,” a series of discourses first published in Lucifer under the editorship of HPB. There are, however, alternative interpretations (see Adam Warcup: Cyclic Evolution, Wheaton: Theosophical Publishing House, 1987).
13 It is very important to note that the “root races” are not the ethnic classifications known to profane anthropology. They refer rather to the various stages of the progressive awakening of human consciousness during its sojourn on a particular planet.
 
other words, the monads undergo seven root races on globe A, followed by another seven on globe B, and so forth through globe G.
We have been given limited information about the root races on our planet in this our fourth round. The first race was the progeny of the Lunar Pitris who had remained on Earth while the life-wave passed around the chain and back again. This race, as well as the second, was supposed to have had giant, ethereal bodies, becoming more compact as time went on.
It was during the third root race, the Lemurian, that humankind assumed its present dense, material form about 18 million years ago. Reproduction during the early races occurred in all sorts of strange ways, the present mode of sexual intercourse being inaugurated when humanity assumed the dense material form. Before that, humans were hermaphrodites, being neither male nor female. It was during this period (third root race), with the division of the sexes, that the Solar Pitris (perfected human spirits of a past cycle) awakened the self-conscious mind in humans and made them responsible for good and evil. It is said that volcanoes and earthquakes destroyed the third race. The Lemurian civilization, which dwelt on lands now submerged beneath the Pacific and Indian Oceans, was totally destroyed.
The nucleus of new racial types, which was to become the next race, had been developing for several thousands of years. They occupied the new configuration of continents and islands produced by the cataclysmic upheavals in Lemuria and are known as the Atlanteans—the fourth root race. They developed a high civilization but one which was much less spiritual than that of Lemuria. It was the bottom of the cycle of seven root races and represented the apex of materiality. Toward the end of their period, the Atlanteans became divided into two classes—the followers of black and of white magic. The former were doomed to destruction by karma while the latter were destined to become the “seed stock” of the fifth root race—the Aryan.
The nucleus of the fifth race formed in Central Asia under the direction of the Great Ones and became distinct as a racial type about one million years ago. Atlantis perished in a series of cataclysms, the island described by Plato being the last part to go (about 11,000 years ago). The seeds of the next phase of consciousness, the sixth sub-race of the fifth root race, will emerge from the melting pot of America, it is said. Two additional root races remain to be evolved before humanity moves on to globe E at some distant time in the future.
We have seen that the evolution of form is but the reflection of the evolution of the soul-consciousness animating that form. As it passes from race to race on planet after planet on its evolutionary journey, the “Pilgrim Soul” is striving to realize its true nature. It seeks to understand itself for what it really is. It seeks to realize its identity with the Universal Life, Light, and Love, which has been called God, and to grow more
 
responsive to the creative power within itself. It is the accumulated experience in all the heights and depths of life that assists the Pilgrim in attaining this realization. This pro- cess of internal growth awakens little by little all the potentials of innate godliness. The analogy of a flower, unfolding as it grows, is an apt one.14 The attributes of a Buddha or a Christ exist as seed-like potentialities in the Inner Self of everyone. In order that the seed of divine life might germinate and grow, it is buried in the soil of material condi- tions. Here the seed sprouts and gives rise to the plant, which bears finally the blossom of divinity. In the course of this growth process, one becomes an immensely powerful being, a conscious co-worker with the evolutionary process. The expansion of the faculties of the mental and spiritual natures endows humanity with divine powers of which “extrasensory perception” and “clairvoyance” are but shadowy presentiments.
As a mass, our humanity has reached only the fourth round with its accompanying stage of spiritual unfoldment. However, there are some individuals who are passing through the higher stages or rounds of life-experience, those which deal with one’s immortal nature. There are a few who are vastly ahead of most in the process of  spiritual evolution. These are radiant individuals such as Gautama the Buddha and Jesus the Christ. Fully awakened to the Divine Radiance within, Jesus, the Buddha, and all those mighty personalities (Indian tradition call them “Mahatmas” or “Great Souls”) who come at different times as saviors to the many different peoples, are the Elder Brothers of the human race. They are compassionate and loving guides and teachers, tirelessly working to kindle within humanity the realization of spiritual values and ideals. They reveal the potentialities that lie within everyone.
“These things I do ye shall do also” was not an idle statement but a solemn prophecy. In the far-distant past these Great Ones had to go through experiences such as we are now encountering. There was a time when they were sinning and erring mortals like ourselves, bound to their karma, and caught in a web of suffering of their own making. But they found the path that leads to the cessation of suffering and they followed it, as every being must eventually do. The future will see every living being climb the upward path, and ultimately every victorious ego will be able to say with Jesus, “I have overcome the world” and “I and my Father are one.” The one-time  human beings, now entering the ranks of the conscious gods, will begin to climb the long ladder back to the Divine Source from which they emerged. They are now Lords of Life and are to become the conscious, creative agents in the universe called in Eastern Occultism the Dhyan Chohans—the “Lords of Meditation.” The vast hierarchy of Dhyan Chohans of various grades and orders is the “heavenly host” of all sacred literature.


14 This is the symbol of the Rosicrucian Order. The rose blooming on the cross symbolizes our spiritual nature unfolding through the trials and tribulations of earth-life.
 
Questions from Students
Q: I have read in some Theosophical books that the planetary chain, of which you speak, includes the planets Mars and Mercury. It is said, I believe, that we came from Mars and will go on to Mercury when we are through here.
A: That is an old controversy. Theosophists have been arguing about it for over one hundred years. In the early days of the Theosophical Society, A. P. Sinnett interpreted a passage in a letter from a Master to say that Mars and Mercury were in the Earth chain. He published this mistaken idea in Esoteric Buddhism, and HPB had to correct it in The Secret Doctrine (See 1:162-170). It is all there as she wrote it and you can read it for yourself. But Sinnett could never bring himself to accept her explanation. After HPB’s death, with the help of “clairvoy- ants” who claimed to have visited Mars to check him out, he convinced others that his version was the correct one. At any rate, since those early days the idea has been promulgated by many Theosophists down even to the present time.

Q: Other books, I believe, have located the invisible globes of the planetary chain on the higher and lower mental and on the emotional planes.
A: This is another misconception. As HPB wrote in Section Six of The Key to Theosophy, each of the globes of the chain has its own subjective and objective existence, its own visible and invisible aspects. Humanity has the same seven principles when embodied on any globe of the septenary chain, but these prin- ciples are in different states on the different globes. This is a difficult subject as HPB explained: “Those alone, whom we call adepts, who know how to direct their mental vision and to transfer their consciousness—physical and psychic both—to other planes of being, are able to speak with authority on such sub- jects.” And even these adepts “are aware how difficult it is, even for them, to put themselves into full rapport . . . with the planes of consciousness within our system, but differing from the states of consciousness possible on this globe; i.e., on the three planes of the chain of spheres beyond our earth” (The Secret Doctrine, 2:701).

Q:  Some writers have said that the other globes of the planetary chain are merely the inner, invisible “principles” of our Earth.
A: This is another misunderstanding, I believe. In a letter to A. P. Sinnett, HPB affirmed that the seven globes are “scattered about”(The Letters of H. P. Blavatsky to A. P. Sinnett, p. 92), whatever that may be interpreted to mean. It is wrong, really, to think of them in terms of our notions of spatial relationships. As she wrote in Key to Theosophy, “It is not only that their material density, weight, or
 
fabric are entirely different from those of our earth and the other known planets; but they are (to us) on an entirely different layer of space, so to speak . . . What I mean by ‘layer’ is that plane of infinite space which by its nature cannot fall under our ordinary waking perceptions, whether mental or physical; but which exists in nature outside of our normal mentality or consciousness, outside our three dimensional space, and outside our division of time” (p. 54).

Q: We are in the fourth chain of our cycle, are we not, and the Moon chain was the third?
A: It is generally assumed that there are seven reimbodiments of our chain that take place during the solar manvantara. HPB did not state categorically in which of these cycles we are living. Many writers speculate that the Moon chain was the third of the series and that our Earth chain is the fourth. Another speculation would place us in the fifth, making the Moon the fourth. This conjecture, which may be traced back to an article by W. Q. Judge (The Path, July 1892:117-19) has been related by Geoffrey Barborka (The Peopling of the Earth) to the following cryptic statement contained in the Stanzas of Dzyan:
The Dhyanis came and looked . . . the Dhyanis from the bright Father-Mother, from the white (Solar-lunar) regions they came, from the abodes of the Immortal Mortals. (The Secret Doctrine, 2: 55)
Displeased they were. Our flesh is not there (they said). [This is] no fit rupa for our brothers of the fifth. No dwellings for the lives. Pure waters, not turbid, they must drink. Let us dry them. (Ibid., 2:57)
These stanzas refer to the period of time during which the foundations for human evolution in the fourth round were being laid. It is suggested that the sentence, “No fit rupa (forms) for our brothers of the fifth” refers to the fifth manvantaric reimbodiment of our chain. Another interpretation of these words, however, may be given. We would suggest that “the fifth” refers, not to the chain cycle at all, but to the fifth creative hierarchy, which is to “enter” humanity and awaken Manas. For HPB writes, “It becomes the task of the fifth Hierarchy, the mysterious beings that preside over the constellation Capricornus, Makara, or ‘Crocodile’ in India as in Egypt, to inform the empty and ethereal animal form and make of it the Rational Man”(Ibid., 1:233). It would seem that this interpre- tation of “our brothers of the fifth” is equally valid, leaving the question of the exact world-cycle unanswered. There is a strange statement in the Transactions of the Blavatsky Lodge which says, “The sun is older than any of its planets though younger than the moon” (Collected Writings, 10:401). This would seem to suggest
 
that our present chain is the first of a series of seven to be evolved in a relatively new solar system! All we can do is speculate.

Q: Can you say more about the Lunar Pitris who lead the other classes of monads into incarnation?
A: They are the highest human monads from the lunar chain, the highest that move on to our chain as humans at any rate.

Q: Are they Dhyan Chohans?
A. They are. The advanced humanity of the lunar chain became the “creators” or “builders” of the Earth chain. So it is quite correct to say that the Lunar Pitris are Dhyan Chohans, although of a low order.

Q: I have trouble understanding, then, how they can pass through the lower kingdoms in the first round. If they are already Dhyan Chohans, how is this possible?
A: When we say they pass through the lower kingdoms in the first round we do not mean that they pass through the kingdoms as we know them today. They gather cosmic matter around themselves and throw it off again as the prototypes for the various kingdoms. The lower kingdoms develop from the “cast off clothes” of the Lunar Dhyan Chohans, if that makes any sense. The Pitris who act in this way are called the Builders.

Q: Where are they today? What has become of them?
A: It may sound odd to you, but the leading edge of our humanity belongs to the lower classes of Builders. The Masters are higher ones. The highest have already gone into nirvana.

Q: How about the ones who gave birth to the first race?
A: They are the higher ones who have gone into nirvana. They had already completed their human cycle when the life-wave left the Earth in the last round. They sacrificed themselves by remaining here while we made our circuit of the chain, and when we came back they threw off “doubles” of themselves for us to enter in the first Root Race. Then they passed on into nirvana.

Q: You say that some of us are Builders. How about the rest?
 
A: Our human race is composed of the first four classes of monads that came over from the lunar chain. Along with the three classes which are now animals, plants, and minerals, they make up the seven main classes. There are also relative newcomers who are the nature spirits. Those of our humanity who belong to the first class are Lunar Pitris. They assumed human form in the first round and became the leaders or the front guard of our humanity. The next class is less advanced. They emerged from the animal kingdom in the second round. The other two classes of humanity began their human incarnations in the third and fourth rounds respectively.

Q: If these latter classes became human only in the later rounds, how can they finish seven rounds on earth?
A: They do not all reach the goal in this manvantara or cycle. Some “flunk out of school,” you might say. But in the next planetary manvantara when they move on to another “chain,” they will belong to a more advanced group. It takes us several manvantaras to master being human. Why do you think the Masters are able to move so rapidly through their evolution as to reach in this fourth round the stage of inner evolution which most will attain only in the fifth round? It is because they have manvantaras of experience behind them. Many have speculated about the “inner rounds” but it comes to this: at an inner level, you may be in the fifth round while the life-wave has completed, in the outer sense, only four circuits of the chain. But you can do this only if you have accumulated enough experience in past cycles of planetary evolution that the lessons of earth life come relatively easily to you in this cycle.

Q: Then there are not actually among us monads which are passing for the fifth time around the chain of worlds?
A: There are, in fact, such monads. They have been coming into our planet for the last several thousand years. But this pertains to a different phase of the teaching, one which is profoundly esoteric. If you will study The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett and also The Letters of H. P. Blavatsky to A. P. Sinnett, you may obtain a glimmer of the idea. Study especially, in the latter book, the notes given by HPB on the “lokas and talas,” the seven and fourteen “worlds” which collectively constitute each globe of the planetary chain.

Q: I have heard it said that the Lunar Pitris are our lower principles and not our monadic selves.
 
A: Many words used in the early Theosophical writings were never clearly and rigidly defined. “Pitri” is one of these words. Sometimes all the classes of monads which came from the Moon have been called “Pitris.” With this use of the word, all the kingdoms are Pitris and, as there is an interblending or over- lapping of all the kingdoms in us, it is permissible to say in this sense that our lower principles are animated by lower classes of Pitris while our human monads are higher classes. We borrow from all the kingdoms in building our vehicles of expression. You may complete the picture by thinking about the Solar Pitris or Manasaputras who overshadow our lunar monads and fire up our manas, using us as vehicles for their own evolution on a higher level.

Q: Do the Solar Pitris come from Venus? I seem to have read this somewhere.
A: Some writers have said this. However, it is not so stated in The Secret Doctrine. What is stated there is that the third root race, during which time the great manasic awakening occurred, was presided over by the planetary hierarchy of Venus, which rules the Higher Manas. Venus is also called the sister planet of the Earth.

Q: Where, then, do these Solar Pitris come from?
A: From planets which lived and died countless aeons ago, in another solar system perhaps. This is what HPB wrote on the subject:
After becoming a Dhyan Chohan, a man does not, according to the Law of Nature, incarnate on any of the other planetary chains of this Solar System. The whole Solar System is his home. He continues to discharge his duties in the Government of this Solar System until the time of Solar Pralaya, when his monad, after a period of rest, will have to overshadow in another Solar System a particular human being during his successive incarnations, and attach itself to his higher principles when he becomes a Dhyan Chohan in his turn. (Collected Writings, 6:248-9)

Q: Then the Solar Pitris become a part of our own constitution?
A: That is right. They are our Higher Egos. They overshadow and inform the lunar parts of us, inflaming our Manas and setting it into activity. They pass on the light of self-consciousness to us as they received it from others, and so on and on. HPB treats this subject extensively in The Secret Doctrine, especially in the portion on Anthropogenesis. The following passage fairly well sums it up:
It is only when, from a potential androgyne, man has become separated into male and female, that he will be endowed with this conscious, rational, individual Soul (Manas), ‘the principle, or the intelligence, of the Elōhīm,’ to
 
receive which, he has to eat of the fruit of Knowledge from the Tree of Good and Evil. How is he to attain all this? The Occult doctrine teaches that while the monad is cycling on downward into matter, these very Elōhīm—or Pitris, the lower Dhyani-Chohans—are evolving pari passu with it on a higher and more spiritual plane, descending also relatively into matter on  their  own plane of consciousness, when, after having reached a certain point, they will meet the incarnating senseless monad, encased in the lowest matter, and blending the two potencies, Spirit and Matter, the union will produce that terrestrial symbol of the “Heavenly Man” in space—PERFECT MAN. (The Secret Doctrine, 1: 247)

Q: Does this passing on of the flame of Manas from the Solar Pitris to our humanity occur all at one time—once and for all—in the third root race on our planet in the fourth round?
A: No, this lighting up of the Manas is a gradual process, and the same drama is repeated on each planet. The different classes of humanity, the different grades of lunar monads, differ in their degree of progress and hence in their receptivity to the quickening influence of the Solar Pitris.

Q: Then this is why there are some “elect” who do not fall into sin?
A: Just so. The most progressed monads become, from the moment of their “quickening,” the perfect “incarnations” of their overshadowing Dhyanis. They have “fallen” and been “redeemed” time and time again in the past and can no longer yield to the temptations of self-conscious Earth life. They become the “elect” of humanity, its guides and teachers, its masters, in short.

Q: How about the Sons of Will and Yoga? You say their bodies were created by mind power. Who did the creating?
A: The “elect” did it. That portion of the race, which having been endowed with self-consciousness did not fall into sin, and created by the union of their spiritual will a vehicle into which the highest Dhyanis could incarnate. HPB explained it this way:
It was not a Race, this progeny. It was at first a wondrous Being, called the “Initiator,” and after him a group of semi-divine and semi-human beings. “Set apart” in Archaic genesis for certain purposes, they are those in whom are said to have incarnated the highest Dhyanis, “Munis and Rishis from previous Manvantaras”—to form the nursery for future human adepts, on this earth and during the present cycle. These “Sons of Will and Yoga” born, so to speak, in an immaculate way, remained, it is explained, entirely apart from the rest of mankind. (The Secret Doctrine, 1: 207)
 

Q: To change the subject, how does the Theosophical view of evolution relate to the Darwinian theory?
A: The Darwinian theory does not recognize the existence and overruling influence of the Builders, the creative Dhyan Chohans. It attributes the differentiation of biological forms to chance molecular interactions, the unsuitable organisms  being eliminated by “natural selection” or the “survival of the fittest.” Occultism, on the other hand, postulates the activity of the Builders behind it all. It is only after they have furnished the prototypes of all the kingdoms that natural selec- tion begins to play an important part, weeding out unsuitable modifications which branch off from the original prototypes, and allowing the fit to survive. You may find Man in Evolution by G. de Purucker and Evolution and Creation: A Theosophic Synthesis by W.T.S. Thackara, both published by the Theosophical University Press, to be helpful in understanding these points.

Q: I take it you do not accept the idea that we descended from any species of ape?
A: That’s right. In this round, the human form was already here when the cycle began on our planet. The Sishta had preserved it through the “obscuration,” and all that was required was for them to throw off astral images of themselves, which became the bodies for those of the first root race. The monads coming in from Globe C stepped into these bodies and began their evolution.
All the mammalian species can be traced back to the first ethereal races of early humanity. The very first human stock reproduced by “division,” almost as the microscopic amoeba does today. Later they exuded “buds” from themselves, which developed into new human organisms. Just as occasional “monsters” are produced in childbirth even today, some of the “buds” developed not  into  human beings but into other kinds of creatures which then, reproducing, gave rise to whole new species on their own pathways of evolution. This was the origin of all the various mammalian species.
During the third race, after the division of sexes but before the minds of all humankind had been awakened, some of the “mindless” ones bred with some of the early mammalians and produced a stock of ape-like creatures. Later on, during the Atlantean period, others renewed the “sin of the mindless,” breeding with the descendants of these first ape-like creatures. But as their minds were now awakened, they were to be held karmically responsible for their actions. At any rate, the present apes were brought into existence as the offspring of this interbreeding.
 
Q: That is certainly a strange idea, and it is hard to imagine science ever accepting it.
A: It is a strange teaching, no doubt. Nevertheless, it is the teaching of the Masters, and we can only wait to see if science will confirm it as it has confirmed other occult teachings.

Q: I have read somewhere about the seven creative hierarchies. It is said that humanity is the fourth, is it not?
A: This has been stated by various writers, but it is interesting to note that HPB never said this in so many words. What she did say is that the fourth hierarchy is “the nursery of the human conscious spiritual souls”(The Secret Doctrine, 1:218). It is easy to see how this may be interpreted to mean that humankind is the fourth hierarchy. It all hinges on the word “nursery.” You will recall that a passage was quoted above in which HPB said that the Sons of Will and Yoga formed a nursery for future human adepts. That quotation did not imply that the Sons of Will and Yoga are the future adepts. They were the Divine Instructors of those adepts. In the same way it seems to me that the fourth creative hierarchy is not the “human, conscious spiritual souls” but, again, the instructors and Divine Prototypes of the latter. This viewpoint receives further support from the following passage:
Arupa, formless, at the upper rung of the ladder of Being, materializing more and more as they descend in the scale of objectivity and form, ending in the grossest and most imperfect of the Hierarchy, man—it is the former purely spiritual group that is pointed out to us, in our Occult teaching, as the nursery and fountainhead of human beings. (Collected Writings, 14: 379)

Q: And who, then are the other creative hierarchies?
A: According to this classification, which is numbered beginning with the sixth of the complete series (see Appendix III), the hierarchy we have been discussing is the fourth, the Solar Pitris are the fifth, the Lunar Pitris are the sixth, and the seventh is earthly humanity along with the lower orders of terrestrial life, the various elementals. This corresponds to the Hindu classification of the “four bodies of Brahma.” These have been explained as “gods, demons, pitris, and men.” The gods are the higher Dhyan Chohans. The demons are the Solar Pitris, the “fallen angels,” who fire up self-consciousness in humanity and make humans responsible agents for good and evil. The Lunar Pitris are monads who have passed beyond the animal kingdom but who have yet to realize the full promise of humanity and the last is earthly or animal humanity and the subhuman elementals.
 
It may perhaps help you to think of all these hierarchies as different levels of one stream of consciousness. Separate in one sense, each with its own set of “principles,” they yet interpenetrate and unite together to make us the complex beings we are today. Thus we take from the seventh hierarchy our terrestrial and elemental aspects. This is animated by the form-creating aspect, i.e., the evolving human awareness of the lunar monads (sixth hierarchy) which, in turn, is informed by the fully self-conscious and intellectual aspect (fifth hierarchy) and overshadowed by the archetypal and spiritual aspect (fourth hierarchy). In this sense humanity is a composite of all the hierarchies.

Q: You confused me when you mentioned the elementals. I thought they preceded the mineral kingdom.
A: “Elemental” is another vague word. In its broadest sense, it includes all the lower orders of life. In this sense HPB wrote, “no units of either of the kingdoms are animated any longer by monads destined to become human in their next stage, but only by the lower Elementals of their respective realms,” adding that “these ‘Elementals’ will become human monads, in their turn, only at the next great planetary Мanvantara”(The Secret Doctrine, 1:184). The door has been closed to their future progress in this our cycle. But you are right. In its more limited sense the term elemental does refer to the three kingdoms of involving life, the king- doms which precede the mineral and which have been called nature spirits.

Q: How do we distinguish between the nature spirits of which you speak and the devas who are supposed to constitute an evolution parallel to our own? I have read that they come from certain species like birds and insects and develop into angels from fairies and such.
A: I would remind you that this study is based on the teachings as given by HPB, and she nowhere mentions a parallel evolution of the kind described by other and later writers. On the contrary, she affirmed that all spiritual intelligences in the universe either have been or are progressing toward becoming human. This is what she wrote pertaining to this matter:
Each of these Beings either was, or prepares to become, a man, if not in the present, then in a past or a coming cycle (Manvantara). They are perfected, when not incipient, men . . . As from the Highest Archangel (Dhyan Chohan) down to the last conscious “Builder” (the inferior class of Spiritual Entities) all such are men, having lived aeons ago, in other Manvantaras, on this or other Spheres; so the inferior, semi-intelligent and non-intelligent Elementals—are all future men. That fact alone—that a Spirit is endowed with intelligence—is a
 
proof to the Occultist that that Being must have been a man, and acquired his knowledge and intelligence throughout the human cycle. (Ibid., 1: 275-77 )
In other words, the life-stream has to pass through the human stage at some point. It has been argued that “humanity” means any self-conscious being and that if a parallel kingdom of “devas” becomes self-conscious somewhere along the way, there is no contradiction. From a theoretical point of view this may be true, but we should at least take note of the fact that the teachings of HPB did not explicitly include this idea.

Q: You say that the third root race flourished eighteen million years ago. When did the first root race begin?
A: The time of the beginning of the first race is not given in The Secret Doctrine. All that is given there is the figure of eighteen million years, of which HPB wrote the following:
This duration covers only Vaivasvata-Manu Man, i.e., the male and female entity already separated into distinct sexes. The two and a half Races that preceded that event may have lived 300,000,000 years ago for all that science can tell. (Ibid., 2: 148-49 )
A previously unpublished manuscript in the handwriting of HPB, evidently written four years before the publication of The Secret Doctrine, would seem to suggest a somewhat later date for the third race and would make the eighteen million year figure reach back all the way to the first race. It is difficult to decide, however, how much reliance should be placed in the figures contained in the early manuscript since The Secret Doctrine contains not only one but many state- ments to the effect that the eighteen million years is counted from a point of time during the third race up to the present. Students interested in the chronology of the world cycles as contained in the 1884 manuscript are referred to The Peopling of the Earth by Geoffrey Barborka. (See also Collected Writings 13:301-6.)



 
REFERENCES FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING:
Sinnett, Esoteric Buddhism, chs. 3 “The Planetary Chain,” 4 “The World Period,” 7 “The Human Tide-Wave,” and 8 “The Progress of Humanity.”
Two Students, Theosophical Gleanings.
Van Pelt, Man’s Divine Parentage and Destiny.


QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
1.	Who were the Builders? What did they build and how?
2.	What is a Chain and what is a Round?
3.	At what stage of evolution is our present mankind now in regard to the seven Globes and the seven Rounds in our Chain?
4.	Approximately how old is physical man on our planet?
5.	What is a Fallen Angel? In what way is it “Fallen”?
6.	There are vast differences among mankind regarding intellect, temperaments, capacities, etc. Usually we can account for this in terms of karma from the actions (positive and negative) in past lives that developed intellect, artistic talent, etc. This chapter introduces another explanation that helps account for differences. What is it?
7.	In the “questions and answers” section of this chapter, reference is made to monads that “flunk out of school.” This is referred to in the Bible as the Day of Judgment, and has caused a great deal of problems in beliefs. Does “flunk out of school” sound better to you? What happens to humans who “flunk”? Are they lost forever, as some people believe happens at Judgment Day?
8.	How does the occult theory of evolution differ from the Darwinian theory?
