Chapter 7
The Path of Initiation

The process by which individuals learn to take their own evolution in hand and to proceed consciously into higher levels of spiritual unfoldment has been called the “Path.” Seekers may enter the more advanced stages of the Path when they have pro- gressed to that point in evolution where the desire arises for liberation from the wheel of birth and death. Until this desire arises, the necessary drive is missing that will lead upward and onward toward the final consummation. The ordeals and lessons learned along the Path have as their object the perfecting of the complete septenary nature of a person. The triad (Auric Envelope, Buddhi, and Higher Manas) is to become the perfect vehicle for the overshadowing Spirit. At the same time, the lower quaternary (Lower Manas, Kama, Linga Sharira, and Sthula Sharira) is to become the perfect vehicle of the triad. The pivotal element on which these higher stages of evolution hinge is Manas in both its lower and higher aspects, since it is in this aspect of our being that the quaternary meets the triad. In The Voice of the Silence, a Theosophical classic in which the stages of the Path are set forth, the aspirant is counseled:
Before that path is entered, thou must destroy thy lunar body, cleanse thy mind body, and make clean thy heart. (p. 12 )
The “lunar body” that is to be “destroyed” refers to the carnal desires and mortal senses which bind the ego to mortal existence. The cleansing of the “mind body” refers to the purification of mind, which has two phases:
1.	On the lower mental level, the matter-of-fact, everyday, conscious mind must be disengaged from the appetites and senses and united with its parent-mind—the higher mental nature which contains the accumulated mental impressions from all past existences. When this process is completed the “corruptible is raised up incorruptible.” The mundane personality becomes one with the undying individuality.
2.	On the higher mental level, the realm of the egoic mind or reincarnating intelli- gence, Manas, must become more and more radiant (Taijasi) with the light of wisdom, Buddhi.
The mind has been referred to as a mirror. Just as a mirror may collect dust and thus reflect a distorted image, so the mind may fail to perfectly reflect the image of the Resplendent Lord of which it is the vehicle. The mind must therefore be cleansed and polished so that it becomes a perfect reflector of its Inner God. The cleansing process is necessarily painful. It is the “sorting of the sheep and the goats”—i.e., the separation of
 
those elements that are worthy to be taken into eternity from those which are not suited to soar higher than the earthly plane to which they belong. For this reason, no sooner does one set their feet on the Path than it becomes necessary to face oneself honestly. Whatever karmic skeletons may be shut up within the closets of the forgotten past must be revealed. Those aspects of the personality and character which require further cultivation must be worked upon. The roots of unwholesome conduct—delusion, anger, and greed—must be understood and annihilated. The roots of wholesome conduct— wisdom, loving-kindness, and self-sacrifice—must be quickened and brought to active life.
The Buddha’s Four Noble Truths set forth a framework in which the Path may be understood. The first Noble Truth says that all life is unsatisfactory. Whipped about by delusion, greed, and anger, human life is a perpetual series of ups and downs with the downs in the majority. The Voice of the Silence describes this poignantly:
Behold the Hosts of Souls. Watch how they hover o’er the stormy sea of human life, and how exhausted, bleeding, broken-winged, they drop one after another  on the swelling waves. Tossed by the fierce winds, chased by the gale, they drift into the eddies and disappear within the first great vortex. (p. 9 )
The second Noble Truth is the insight that all this suffering has a cause, and this cause is desire or craving, having its root in ignorance. The third Noble Truth proclaims that by overcoming this ignorance, the wheel of birth and death may be brought to a halt. The fourth Truth sets out the Noble Eightfold Path to achieve this goal. This Path is as follows: 15

1.	Right Understanding or Knowledge
(The first step, and the basis from which all others must follow, or we will go astray.)
2.	Right Aspiration
(The will to attain, based on self-discipline and inner intuitive vision.)
3.	Right Speech
(Shun gossip, slander, abuse of others, and foolish talk; be truthful and kind in all you say.)
4.	Right Action or Conduct
(Let each action be guided by the inner law of Love, Compassion, and Wisdom.)
5.	Right Livelihood
(Engage in work which injures no one, human or any other living creature.)
6.	Right Effort
(Apply one’s strength and energy, with understanding, to wise and useful purposes.)

15 The comments added in parentheses are taken from Buddhism for the West by Dorothy C. Donath.
 
7.	Right Mindfulness
(In every activity of life.)
8.	Right Meditation or Contemplation

By living according to these standards, the aspirant is cleansed, regenerated, and gradually liberated from the fetters preventing liberation and enlightenment. As disci- ples become freed from the fetters, innumerable virtues arise within them. In Mahayana Buddhism, the primary virtues are called the Paramitas or “perfections.” These are tabulated in The Voice of the Silence as follows: (pp. 52-3).16
1.	Charity and love immortal
2.	Harmony in word and act
3.	Patience sweet that naught can ruffle
4.	Indifference to pleasure and pain
5.	Dauntless energy that fights its way to supernal TRUTH
6.	Ceaseless contemplation
7.	Penetrating insight or perfect wisdom
Progress along the Path eventually leads to contact with a Teacher who is to initiate the aspirant into the mysteries of the inner Self. Written words cannot express the sacredness of the relationship between the disciple and the Master or Guru. H. P. Blavatsky spoke of her Teacher in the following words, which give perhaps a glimmer of the guru-chela relationship:
I venerate the Masters and worship MY Master—the sole creator of my inner self which but for His calling it out, awakening it from its slumber, would have never come to conscious being—not in this life, at all events . . . (The Letters of H. P. Blavatsky to A. P. Sinnett, p. 104)
The Guru is often referred to as a father who gives new birth to the regenerated person. This idea is expressed as follows in The Voice of the Silence:
Seek for him who is to give thee birth in the Hall of Wisdom, the Hall which lies beyond, wherein all shadows are unknown, and where the light of truth shines with unfading glory. (p. 8)
Besides the assistance of the embodied, living Guru, there is another and higher Master with whom the aspirant must come into intimate contact in the higher stages of the journey. This Master is the Solar Pitri who first kindled the flame of Manas and who will initiate the aspirant into the mysteries of the Macrocosm. The highest and greatest Master is Atma, the God within—the ray of the Divine Logos.



16 Most sources list six or ten paramitas.
 
As they progress in their journey along the Path, aspirants pass through a series of “initiations” which mark the stages of their Pilgrimage.17 Although there are countless more or less minor initiations, esoteric teaching speaks of four major ones which are of great importance as they mark the final four steps toward spiritual victory. In the Bud- dhist teachings, these initiations are described as the four “Paths” leading to nirvana. The first initiation is that in which the aspirant “enters the stream.” The disciple, called at this time Srotapatti or “stream-enterer,” is beginning to move down the “home- stretch” of spiritual attainment. From the moment of entering the stream, it is taught, the candidate for spiritual conquest has but seven more obligatory earth lives. The next initiation is that of the Sakridagamin, the “once-returner.” The final life on earth will be a life of trial—the final trial which, once passed, will lead beyond this veil of tears called earth to spiritual vistas hitherto unknown. There is an interesting double meaning in  the title Sakridagamin, “he who is to receive birth.” Not only does it refer to the final life of trial, that of the “suffering servant,” but it refers to the “new birth” to be received. The suffering Chrestos is to be reborn as the triumphant, glorified Christos. The Adept, receiving new birth, becomes an Anagamin—“he who is no more reborn” unless voluntarily for the sake of humanity. The Hindu equivalent is a Jivanmukta, meaning a “liberated soul.”
The three initiations which have been described find their parallel in many systems. Freemasons have their Entered Apprentice, Fellowcraft, and Master Mason initiations, the last of which preserves the mystery of mystical death and rebirth implicit in the Anagamin initiation. The Martinists similarly have three degrees of initiation, reflecting the ancient tradition. The third initiation is sometimes referred to as the last,  not because it is really the last―for there are other and greater summits which may be reached―but because it is the last to be received by the “old” man or personality. The Adept, now reborn as Perfect Master, begins life anew from this point onward. The Initiate must now choose whether to progress on toward the goal free and clear of the suffering of earth, or to remain with humanity, voluntarily reincarnating again and again for the sake of humankind. The fourth, or Arhat initiation, can be attained either way. One who remains “in the world but not of the world,” voluntarily reincarnating, becomes what is called in Northern Buddhism a “Bodhisattva.” Because such a one remains with and helps humanity along its way, the Bodhisattva is regarded as superior to one who moves onward in the realms of spirit to liberation or Pratyeka Buddhahood, the state of the so-called “selfish Buddha.” The Bodhisattva becomes, later on, a “perfect Buddha,” whose state of perfect Enlightenment far transcends the more limited goal of liberation or nirvana. As vision awakens and grows on the higher planes of the cosmos, the Pratyeka Buddha is able to reach in full consciousness the third solar plane—the

17 The Dark Adepts or “Brothers of the Shadow” have a parallel system of initiation by which they become co- workers with the destructive side of Nature but we shall not speak further of it here.
 
jivic—but the vision of such a lofty one stops there. Only the Buddhas of Compassion can soar beyond, the Teachers affirm.
In the ordinary course of evolution, humanity will reach the state of full spiritual responsibility during the fifth great round of evolution. A critical time of great trial will mark the transition to that state, and those who survive the trials will be a new “reborn” humanity. Those who are unable to keep up with the others are the “failures” of this manvantaric cycle. They will have to wait until a new manvantara to continue along their way. This period during the fifth round has been referred to as a “judgment day,” as it brings to mind the allegories of the Christian and other religions, which speak of such an event.18 Those who attain Mastership before that time, prematurely so to speak, are those who lead and watch over the human race or who, choosing the way of liberation, move onward in spirit toward nirvana.
It is commonly but erroneously believed that, once Mastership is attained, the Adept is free from rebirth throughout the manvantaric cycle. This is not true. The Adept who has passed prematurely through the trials of the fifth round has merely, in the words of a Master, “learned how to burst through the vicious cycles—and to pass periodically into the Paranirvana” (The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, p. 358). Doing so, such a person “attains in the interim the wisdom of an Arhat, then that of a Buddha and thus gets relieved of a round or two” (Ibid.). When spiritual rebirth has become the common lot of humanity in the fifth round, such advanced Adepts will once more reincarnate along with their fellows who have now caught up. If they have attained Buddhahood (an achievement to be obtained by the masses only in the sixth round), then they must reincarnate along with the sixth round humanity when that time comes. In the meantime, they have earned the right to nirvana if they choose to accept it. If not, they remain and work to uplift humanity.
There exist seven classes (Rays) or groups of Masters, each of which is headed by a particular Chohan or superior adept. The vast majority of the Masters belong to five of these “Rays,” as they are called. The other two Rays are very mysterious and their representatives appear only rarely. These seven classes are referred to by T. Subba Row as follows:
Every class of adepts has its own bond of spiritual communion which knits them together . . . The only possible and effectual way of entering into such brother- hood . . . is by bringing oneself within the influence of the spiritual light which radiates from one’s own Logos. I may further point out here . . . that such com- munion is only possible between persons whose souls derive their life and substance from the same divine RAY, and that, as seven distinct rays emanate


18 This is not to be confused with the “Last Judgment” which takes place at the completion of all seven rounds (The Mahatma Letters to A.P. Sinnett, pp. 326-7)
 
from the “Central Spiritual Sun,” all adepts and Dhyan Chohans are divisible  into seven classes, each of which is guided, controlled, and over-shadowed by one of the seven forms or manifestations of the divine Wisdom. (T. Subba Row Collected Writings, 2: 406)





A great deal of foolishness has been written and taught about the Rays and a great deal of imagination has been utilized to fill in gaps which were intentionally left out of the explanations given to early students. The most authoritative and suggestive state- ments on this subject—vague and cryptic as they are—are contained in the notes made on instructions given by T. Subba Row to a group of students in the early years. These notes have been published in T. Subba Row Collected Writings (2:415-49).
 
Figure 5 is a brief and very sketchy table of the Rays which is said to have been given by one of the Masters to some of the early members of the Theosophical Society (The Masters and the Path, p. 229).
There are many grades and degrees of Mastership. There are Masters living on earth and there are Masters who for the time being are working between incarnations in the spiritual realm. Another mode of work, available to the highest Initiates, is the use of the so-called Nirmanakaya vesture. HPB describes this as the “ethereal form which one would assume when, leaving the physical, he would appear in his astral body— having in addition all the knowledge of an adept” (Voice of the Silence, p. 77). She continues her explanation as follows:
The Bodhisattva develops it in himself as he proceeds on the path. Having reached the goal and refused its fruition, he remains on earth, as an Adept; and when he dies, instead of going into Nirvana, he remains in that glorious body he has woven for himself, invisible to uninitiated mankind, to watch over and protect it. (Ibid.)
The Nirmanakayas work in a number of mysterious ways. Some form around themselves an illusory material form which they can use for work in the world. Others actually reincarnate, taking either an ordinary birth or reanimating the just-deceased body of another. Others “overshadow” from time to time selected sympathetic individ- uals who thus become their instruments in helping humanity. It would appear for example, from certain cryptic remarks made by HPB, that W. Q. Judge, one of the founders of the Theosophical Society, was overshadowed by such a Nirmanakaya (William Quan Judge: A Theosophical Pioneer, p. 19).
It is in this mysterious teaching that the true explanation of the “reincarnating lamas” of Tibet is to be found. One of the most mysterious things about the Nirmana- kayas is that the “phantom body” which remains in the world watching  over humankind and acting in this way may be only the terrestrial symbol of the true individual—the monad-ego that is—who has already entered Nirvana. Gautama Buddha, it is affirmed, is the highest Nirmanakaya known to humanity. The story of his manifestations or “reincarnations,” as they have been rather misleadingly called, after his attainment of Nirvana is one of the most recondite mysteries of occultism. A fuller, but still incomplete, discussion of this mystery is contained in the papers of HPB which were published after her death as the third volume of The Secret Doctrine.
Seven Buddhas who represent the second “Ray” appear at rare intervals during the evolution of humanity on a planet. Gautama Buddha was the fourth of this series. Gautama, as mentioned earlier, was a sixth round man and represents the type which will be the common heritage of humankind when the life-wave has passed twice more around our chain of worlds. Maitreya, the next Buddha to appear, is expected in the
 
sixth root-race. This great being is identified with the Kalki Avatar of the Hindus who is to appear at the end of the present dark age and to inaugurate a new era of Light.
At considerably longer intervals even greater beings representing the first “Ray” appear among humanity. A Master describes the appearance of these great beings as follows:
These appear on Earth but at the origin of every new human kind; at the junction of, and close of the two ends of the great cycle. And they remain with man no longer than the time required for the eternal truths they teach to impress themselves so forcibly upon the plastic minds of the new races as to warrant them from being lost or entirely forgotten in ages hereafter, by the forthcoming generations. The mission of the planetary Spirit is but to strike the KEY NOTE OF TRUTH. Once he has directed the vibration of the latter to run its course uninterruptedly along the catenation of that race and to the end of the cycle—the denizen of the highest inhabited sphere disappears from the surface of our planet—till the following “resurrection of flesh.” (The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, pp. 59-60)
According to T. Subba Row, when such a Great One has passed away the power of the first Ray remains on earth as a substitute for himself. This Presence manifests in a number of different ways ministering to the spiritual needs of humanity. One of these is the “still small voice” which is heard by the aspirant at a certain stage of progress along the Path. Another is that which overshadows certain great Adepts and works through them for a time. Tradition affirms that the Master Jesus was so overshadowed for the three years of his ministry. Another manifestation of the Presence of the planetary spirit is an overshadowing ray which continually expresses itself through the current highest Chohan on the planet. The reader is referred to the notes on oral teachings by T. Subba Row. It may be hinted that there is a connection between these mysteries and that concerning the Buddha which was described by HPB. It is this mystery which, fully understood one day, will explain the mysterious connection between the esoteric or “heart doctrine” of Gautama Buddha, the Advaita Vedanta of Sri Sankaracharya, and the innermost mysteries of Christianity.


Questions from Students
Q: I always thought that a Master was someone who had passed the Fifth Initiation.
A: “Master” is a relative term, of course. But if you define a Master as one who, for the time being, is exempt from earthly incarnation except on a voluntary basis, then this stage is attained at the third or Anagamin Initiation. This was clearly stated by HPB when she wrote “the third is called Anagamin, ‘he who will be
 
reincarnated no more’, unless he so desires in order to help mankind” (The Voice of the Silence, p. 50). In another place she wrote:
In order to become a “perfect One,” the Sakridagamin (“he who will receive new birth,” lit.) had, among other trials, to descend into Patala, the “nether world,” after which process only he could hope to become an “Anagamin”— “one who will be reborn no more.”(Collected Writings, 7: 276)
The next step beyond the Anagamin is the Arhat. “The Arhan,” wrote HPB, “though he can see the Past, the Present, and the Future, is not yet the highest Initiate; for the Adept himself, the initiated candidate, becomes chela (pupil) to a higher Initiate. Three further grades have to be conquered by the Arhan who would reach the apex of the ladder of Arhatship” (The Secret Doctrine, 1:206). So, you see, from our vantage point it is very unwise to dogmatize about the various levels or degrees of occult initiation. Even a high chela, though at a level far removed from a full Mahatma, would appear to us as a “Master.” In discussing these things we are like children in elementary school wondering about what goes on in college or even beyond that in the grades and degrees of graduate school.

Q: But all these things are well known, are they not? I have read descriptions of the various initiation ceremonies, of their presiding officials, the “rods of power” which are used, etc. Can you add anything to these descriptions?
A: Nothing save to urge you to try to forget all about what you have read and thought you understood and believed. Don’t you see that the details of real, esoteric initiation will never be published in books? The best advice that can be given to those desiring to make true spiritual progress is to “first deserve, then desire intimacy with the Mahatmas.” Cultivate the virtues, remain humble, study the lives and teachings of the world’s adepts, do your work, and treat others as you would be treated yourself. The homely Golden Rule is worth its weight in “initiations” and degrees and ceremonies and its application will do more for the true aspirant than a thousand “rods of initiation” whether charged on Venus or Sirius.

Q: I had thought that the Rays had been fairly well characterized. Now you tell me that very little is known about them.
A: Less even than about the initiations, and we know next to nothing about those. Many people think they know all about the Rays. When they see a bossy, pushy person they say, “Oh, he is a First Ray person” or when they see a teacher they say, “She is on the Second Ray.” But surely you must see that this is too simple
 
and easy. If you really want to learn about the Rays—and even then you won’t know very much until you get yourself really initiated—study the little table given on one of the preceding pages and the cryptic notes on T. Subba Row’s oral teachings. Another source is the description of the Shaktis or powers in nature given by the same writer and quoted by HPB in The Secret Doctrine. These, HPB assures us, are the names of the hierarchies of Dhyan Chohans or the “Rays” which emanate from the Central Spiritual Sun. Study also, in this connection, the five “buddha families,” as they are called in Mahayana Buddhism, and the attributes associated with the five “Dhyani Buddhas” who preside over these families. Put all these things together and meditate on them and you can evolve for yourself an understanding of the Rays which will be a closer approximation to the truth of the matter than anything that has been written.

Q: I had always identified the Christ with the second Ray, the same as the Buddha.
But you seem to associate him with the first.
A: That is right, Christos is the first ray “Presence.” Many people identify Christ either with the Master Jesus or with a particular individual on the second ray, Maitreya, the future Buddha of the sixth root race, whom they call the “World Teacher.” This individual, they say, occupied the body of Jesus for the three years of his ministry. They expect him to reappear, and many Theosophists, in the early decades of this century, expected him to manifest through the body of a young Indian boy who was “prepared” for that purpose. There is, however, good reason to believe that the Christ Spirit which manifested for three years through the Initiate Jesus (who himself might have belonged to any Ray) was no living adept but a power, a principle. This power, according to T. Subba Row, was the active, earthly reflex, the manifested Presence, of a high spiritual being, the “planetary” of the first Ray, who set the current of evolution going in the first root race and then later on entered nirvana. Some sects of Chinese Buddhism call this great being Amitabha Buddha and picture him as ruling over a celestial paradise. His active power on earth, his Presence here while he himself is in nirvana, they call Avalokitesvara. (You must be careful here not to confound Amitabha and Avalokitesvara used in this sense with the use of the same words in a cosmological sense to describe Parabrahm and the Logos. To do so would be to make the same mistake as is made by the Christians in identifying the earthly man Christ with the “first-born” Christ, the Logos of cosmogenesis.)

Q: What can I do to prepare myself for walking along the “Path?”
 
A: HPB once gave to her students a paragraph which sets out some of the characteristics of a disciple who is treading the Path. Perhaps it would be a fitting way to close this series of lessons:
A clean life, an open mind, a pure heart, an eager intellect, an unveiled spiritual perception, a brotherliness for all, a readiness to give and receive advice and instruction; a courageous endurance of personal injustice, a brave declaration of principles, a valiant defense of those who are unjustly attacked, and a constant eye to the ideal of human progression and perfection which the sacred science depicts. These are the golden stairs, up the steps of which the learner may climb to the Temple of Divine Wisdom.


 
REFERENCES FOR SUPPLEMENTARY READING:
Collins, Light on the Path. Blavatsky, Voice of the Silence.
Hanson, An Introduction to the Mahatma Letters, chs. 1 “What is a Mahatma?” and 5 “Probation and Chelaship.”

QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION:
1.	Why should one be very careful to take into account the context within which such words as astral, monad, etc. are used, who the author is, and how he/she used the terms?
2.	What is meant by the Path?
3.	Why is Manas the pivotal principle in man?
4.	How does a Master differ from an ordinary person?
5.	What are the roots of wholesome and unwholesome conduct?
