Appendix I

The Seven Principles
Alternative Divisions of the Human Constitution

7th principle—Atma (Spirit)

The human immortal Monads—the Atma, or the irradiating Spirit of every creature of the human family. (The Secret Doctrine, 1:120)

As many men on earth, so many Gods in Heaven; and yet these Gods are in reality ONE, for at the end of every period of activity, they are withdrawn, like the rays of the setting sun, into the Parent Luminary, the Non-Manifested Logos, which in turn is merged into the One Absolute. (Collected Writings, 12:533)

Atma neither progresses, forgets, nor remembers. It does not belong to this plane: it is but the ray of light eternal which shines upon and through the darkness of matter—when the latter is willing. (The Secret Doctrine, 1:244)

6th principle—Buddhi (Spiritual Soul)

Cosmic Ideation focussed in a principle or upādhi (basis) results as the consciousness of the individual Ego. Its manifestation varies with the degree of upādhi . . . through that known as Manas it wells up as Mind-consciousness; through the more finely differentiated fabric (sixth state of matter) of Buddhi resting on the experience of Manas as its basis—as a stream of spiritual INTUITION. (Ibid., 1:329n)

Buddhi is but a mirror which reflects absolute bliss . . . that reflection itself is yet not free from ignorance, and is not the Supreme Spirit, being subject to conditions, being a spiritual modification of Prakriti and an effect; Atma alone is the one real and eternal . . . “the One Witness.” (Ibid., 1:570)

The Sixth Principle in man (Buddhi, the Divine Soul) though a mere breath, in our conceptions, is still something material when compared with divine “Spirit” (Atma) of which it is the carrier or vehicle. Fohat . . . is shown allegorically as trying to bring the pure Spirit, the Ray inseparable from the ONE absolute, into union with the Soul, the two constituting in man the MONAD. (Ibid., 1:119)
 
It may be wrong on strictly metaphysical grounds to call Atma-Buddhi a MONAD, since in the materialistic view it is dual and therefore compound. But . . . since the Universe and the Deity which informs it are unthinkable apart from each other, so in the case of Atma-Buddhi. (Ibid., 1:179)

“A Dhyani has to be an Atma-Buddhi; once the Buddhi-Manas breaks loose from its immortal Atma of which it (Buddhi) is the vehicle, Atman passes into NON-BEING, which is absolute Being.” (Ibid., 1:193)

5th principle—Manas (Human Soul)

Divine Wisdom being diffused throughout the infinite Universe, and our impersonal HIGHER SELF being an integral part of it, the atmic light of the latter can be centered only in that which though eternal is still individualized—i.e., the noetic Principle, the manifested God within each rational being, or our Higher Manas at one with Buddhi. (“The Dual Aspect of Wisdom.” Lucifer, September 1890, p. 4)

The Human Soul, Manas . . . is dual . . . These, then, are what we call the two principles or aspects of Manas, the higher and the lower; the former, the higher Manas, or the thinking, conscious EGO gravitating toward the spiritual Soul (Buddhi); and the latter, or its instinctual principle, attracted to Kama, the seat of animal desires and passions in man. (The Key to Theosophy, p. 73)

It is Manas . . . which is the real incarnating and permanent Spiritual Ego, the INDIVIDUALITY, and our various and numberless personalities only its external masks. (Ibid., p. 83n)

It is that Ego, that “Causal Body” which overshadows every personality Karma forces it to incarnate into; and this Ego which is held responsible for all the sins committed through, and in, every new body or personality—the evanescent masks which hide the true Individual through the long series of rebirths. (Ibid., pp. 83-4)

Since Manas, in its lower aspect, is the seat of the terrestrial mind, it can, therefore, give only that perception of the Universe which is based on the evidence of that mind; it cannot give spiritual vision. (Ibid., p. 100)

If it can be said of Buddhi-Manas that it is unconditionally immortal, the same cannot be said of the lower Manas . . . Manas is, in its lower aspect, a qualitative attribute of the terrestrial personality. (Ibid., p. 100)
 
In its purely metaphysical aspect, Manas, being again one remove (on the downward plane) from Buddhi, is still so immeasurably higher than the physical man that it cannot enter in direct relation with the personality, except through its reflection, the lower mind . . . Buddhi Manas . . . is entirely unfit to manifest during its periodical incarnations, except through the human mind, or lower Manas . . . It is, therefore, the task of the lower Manas, or thinking personality, if it would blend itself with its God, the Divine Ego, to dissipate and paralyze the . . . properties of the material form. (Collected Writings, 12:630-31)

4th principle—Kama Rupa (Animal Soul)

The two higher principles can have no individuality on earth, cannot be man, unless there is (a) the Mind, the Manas-Ego, to recognize itself, and (b) the terrestrial false personality, or the body of egotistical desires and personal Will, to cement the whole, as if round a pivot (which it is truly) to the physical form of man. (The Secret Doctrine, 2:241)

Kama rupa . . . the seat of animal desires and passions . . . this is the center of the animal man, where lies the line of demarcation which separates the mortal man from the immortal entity. (The Key to Theosophy, p. 56)

. . . the principle of animal desire, which burns fiercely during life in matter, resulting in satiety; it is inseparable from animal existence. (The Secret Doctrine, 2:593)

. . . the most dangerous and treacherous of the Principles. (Paradoxes of the Highest Science, р. 123n)

To get rid of Kama we must crush out all our material instincts—“crush  out matter.” The flesh is a thing of habit; it will repeat mechanically a good impulse as well as a bad one. (The Inner Group Teachings of H. P. Blavatsky, pp. 41–2)

3rd principle—Linga Sharira (Astral Body)

Linga sharira . . . the inert vehicle or form on which the body is molded; the vehicle of Life. It is dissipated very shortly after the disintegration of the body. (The Secret Doctrine, 2:593)

. . . man has his “double” or shadow, properly so called, around which the physical body of the fetus—the future man—is built. The imagination of the mother, or an accident which affects the child, will affect also the astral body . . . This “double” is
 
born with man, dies with him, and can never separate itself far from the body  during life, and though surviving him, it disintegrates, pari passu, with the corpse. It is this which is sometimes seen over the graves like a luminous figure of the man that was, during certain atmospheric conditions. (“Dialogues Between Two Editors.” Lucifer, December 1888: 328)

The Linga Sharira is the intermediary between Prana and our physical  body,  and pumps in the life. (The Inner Group Teachings of Н. Р. Blavatsky, p. 120)

2nd principle—Prana (Vital Life Force)

“Prana” or “Life” is, strictly speaking, the radiating force or Energy of Atma—as the Universal Life and the ONE SELF—its lower or rather (in its effects) more physical, because manifesting, aspect. Prana or Life permeates the whole being of the objective Universe; and is called a “principle” only because it is an indispensable factor and the deus ex machina of the living man. (Key to Theosophy, p. 108)

Now Life is in reality Divinity, Parabrahm. But in order to manifest on the Physical Plane it must be assimilated; and as the purely physical is too gross, it must have a medium, viz. the Astral. (The Inner Group Teachings of H. P. Blavatsky, p. 120)

The Astral supports life; it is the reservoir or sponge of life, gathering it up from all the natural kingdoms around, and is the intermediary between the kingdoms of Pranic and physical life. (Ibid., p. 119)

Prana is the parent of the “lives.” As an example, a sponge may be immersed in an ocean. The water in the sponge’s interior may be compared to Prana; outside is Jiva. Prana is the motor-principle in life. The “lives” leave Prana; Prana does not leave them. Take out the sponge from the water, and it becomes dry, thus symbolizing death. (Ibid., p. 25)

1st principle—Sthula Sharira (Physical Body)

The gross matter of the body; the substance formed and molded over the Linga Sharira by the action of Prana. (Secret Doctrine, 2:593)

The body of man is wedded to and remains forever within the body of his planet. (The Mahatma Letters to A. P. Sinnett, p. 119)
