Appendix II

The Progress of the Lunar Monads

The Monads cycling round any septenary chain are divided into seven classes or hierarchies according to their respective stages of evolution, consciousness, and merit. (The Secret Doctrine, 1:171)

When Globe A of the new chain is ready, the first class or Hierarchy of Monads from the Lunar chain incarnate upon it in the lowest kingdom, and so on successively. The result of this is, that it is only the first class of Monads which attains the human state of development during the first Round, since the second class, on each planet, arriving later, has not time to reach that stage. Thus the monads of Class 2 reach the incipient human stage only in the Second Round, and so on up to the middle of the fourth Round. But at this point—and on this Fourth Round in which the human stage will be fully developed—the “Door” into the human kingdom closes; and henceforth the number of “human” Monads, i.e., Monads in the human stage of development, is complete. For the Monads which had not reached the human stage by this point will, owing to the evolution of humanity itself, find themselves so far behind that they will reach the human stage only at the close of the seventh and last Round. They will, there- fore, not be men on this chain, but will form the humanity of a future Manvantara and be rewarded by becoming “Men” on a higher chain altogether, thus receiving their karmic compensation. To this there is but one solitary exception . . . (Ibid., 1:173)

The Monadic Host may be roughly divided into three great classes:
1.	The most developed Monads (the Lunar Gods or “Spirits” called, in India, the Pitris), whose function it is to pass in the first Round through the whole triple cycle of the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms in their most ethereal, filmy, and rudimentary forms, in order to clothe themselves in, and assimilate, the nature of the newly-formed chain. They are those who first reach the human form (if there can be any form in the realm of the almost subjective) on Globe A in the first Round. It is they, therefore, who lead and represent the human ele- ment during the second and third Rounds, and finally evolve their shadows at  the beginning of the Fourth Round for the second class, or those who come behind them.
2.	Those Monads that are the first to reach the human stage during the three and a half Rounds, and to become men.
 
3.	The laggards; the Monads which are retarded, and which will not reach, by reason of Karmic impediments, the human stage at all during this cycle . . . (Ibid., 1:174-5)
The most developed Monads (the lunar) reach the human germ-stage in the first Round; become terrestrial, though very ethereal human beings toward the end of the Third Round, remaining on it (the globe) through the “obscuration” period as the seed for future mankind in the Fourth Round, and thus become the pioneers of Humanity at the beginning of this, the Fourth Round. Others reach the human stage only during later Rounds, i.e., in the second, third, and first half of the Fourth Round. And finally the most retarded of all i.e., those still occupying animal forms after the middle turning- point of the Fourth Round—will not become men at all during this Manvantara. They will reach to the verge of humanity only at the close of the seventh Round to be, in their turn, ushered into a new chain after pralaya—by older pioneers, the progenitors of humanity, or the Seed-Humanity (Śishta), viz, the men who will be at the head of all at the end of these Rounds. (Ibid., 1:182)
Now every “Round” (on the descending scale) is but a repetition in a more concrete form of the Round which preceded it, as every globe—down to our fourth sphere (the actual earth)—is a grosser and more material copy of the more shadowy sphere which precedes it in their successive order, on the three higher planes . . . Thus it becomes clear that the “origin of man,” so called, on this our present Round, or life-cycle on this planet, must occupy the same place in the same order—save details based on local conditions and time—as in the preceding Round. Again, it must be explained and remembered that, as the work of each Round is said to be apportioned to a different group of so-called “Creators” or “Architects,” so is that of every globe; i.e., it is under the supervision and guidance of special “Builders” and “Watchers”—the  various Dhyan Chohans. The group of the hierarchy which is commissioned to “create” men is a special group, then; yet it evolved shadowy man in this cycle just as a higher and still more spiritual group evolved him in the Third Round. (Ibid., 1:232-33)
The reigning kings had finished their cycle on Earth and other worlds, in the preceding Rounds. In the future manvantaras they will have risen to higher systems than our planetary world; and it is the Elect of our Humanity, the Pioneers on the hard and difficult road of progress, who will take the places of their predecessors. The next great Manvantara will witness the men of our own life cycle becoming the instructors and guides of a mankind whose Monads may now yet be imprisoned—semi-conscious
—in the most intellectual of the animal kingdom, while their lower principles will be animating, perhaps, the highest specimens of the Vegetable world. (Ibid., 1:267)
