SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 38. 

Dear Disciple, 
We often receive queries from students who have sat in meditation and felt after a while a sense of coldness, or one of warmth. Many are profoundly puzzled and wish to know what is the meaning of such phenomena, and the reasons for and causes of them. As a matter of fact, there are a number of causes and reasons, and we will enumerate a few of them now. 
When you feel a waft of cold air, an icy feeling up the spine, or all over the body, it means either of three things so far as we are concerned in this our first Grade of the Studies. 
The first, and most common, is that during the period of your meditation you have 'stilled' yourself to such an extent that your heartbeats have slowed down and there is not the usual rapid circulation of the blood going on within you, thus causing your body temperature to drop considerably. 
The second is caused by mere ‘nerves'. You have raised your imagination to such a high pitch that you are beginning to create conditions of awe, or fear, or apprehension as to what is going to happen; and you picture to yourself all sorts of imaginary beings who are entering the room and surrounding you — and you feel afraid, as well you might, for thoughts are forms!! This attitude of mind is completely wrong, of course. When you sit in meditation or concentration, you should first of all make your mind a complete blank. You should not think of anything at all, and, above all you should not imagine anything. The very fact that you are trying to do any of these things, or any others, such as feeling, tasting, smelling, prevents any real phenomena most definitely. 
You must sit down in the dark if you can manage it - shut your eyes, or keep them open if you prefer that, and WAIT!! Keep this up for half an hour if you have the time and patience, remain peaceful, quiet, and at rest; but do not fall asleep if you can help it. Not that falling asleep would harm you if you are at peace within; but it would prevent you from witnessing consciously anything that might happen - and will — if you try the experiment several times; or it may happen straight away the very first time if the conditions are good. 
Before you commence your vigil say a short prayer; anything you like best, and ask the Masters to guide and protect you. By saying "Masters', we mean the Sons of Light, Peace, Goodness and Love; in other words the positive entities of the Solar System under the Hidden Logos, or God. 
If you do this you need have no fears that will cause you to shiver with apprehension, and it is always an excellent plan to commence your day with such a prayer, and repeat it when going to rest at night. You should also do this each time you are going out on important affairs, or when you commence a serious undertaking of any sort. 
The results of your exercises on Peace, Power and Secrecy, which we trust you have not neglected during the last few months, should now begin to manifest in no uncertain manner; and you should now also begin to master your exercises with colour and sound. 
The third possibility with regard to the feelings of coldness may be that you are not truly at Peace within. Then — though it does not happen very often – it is possible that some of the entities or conditions connected with the forces of the Moon have been attracted by your restlessness, lack of equilibrium, and negativeness. The moment such entities or conditions are attracted by your lack of Peace there is felt that cold waft of air, turning you into a block of ice perhaps in your imagination, for all the Moon-forces are cold, being negative! Whenever you feel this coldness (whatever the reason may be) get up at once and go for a brisk walk if you can, or do a job of any sort that will make you warm again. Do not try any further experiments that day, for the conditions within yourself, or without, are not good. 
According to the Ancient Teachings the earthly representative of the Moon is the metal Silver; this is confirmed by modern Science. If Silver is studied in the liquid state it will be found that it changes with the phases of the Moon. If one takes nitrate of silver and pours it through a filter paper it will be seen that different pictures are formed on the paper according to whether the Moon is at the Full, the Half, the Quarter, and so on. Moreover, in each separate month these pictures differ from those in other months at similar phases. 
We know of one scientist who barely escaped a serious illness on account of the fact that seated at his desk he was placed, without being aware of it at first, between a steel safe containing several packets of the crystals of nitrate of silver, and a bench on which stood -- about six feet away — a bowl, containing silver nitrate in solution and in the act of crystallising. This bowl was left in the same place without disturbance for about two weeks, and most of the time the scientist sat exactly between the safe (which was a similar distance away) and the bowl. It seemed, however, that a ray from the crystals towards the solution, or vice versa, was in active operation all the time, in spite of the fact that the crystals were in a thick steel safe. Being seated exactly in the path of the ray, or rays, they went right through the body of the scientist. At first he began to notice an unaccountable feeling of chilliness. This went on for a few days. Then a very nasty cough developed, attended by pains in the lower parts of the lungs. This became so bad that he thought he was due for a dose of pneumonia, but as it was mild weather all the time he could not account for the chilliness which caused him to feel ill. And then he noticed a definite draught in his laboratory: yet there was no wind. And then it occurred to him to move the bowl to another spot, and when he got quite close to it he felt that the 'draught' actually came out of the bowl, through its glass sides. From the safe came a similar draught, the two meeting at the centre of the laboratory, just where the scientist's desk was placed. After the bowl was removed there were no further draughts! 
That ‘ray' had a very lowering effect, and the same is the case with the Moon-rays, as you know. Therefore, any forces or entities from the Moon have the same lowering effect on the human or animal system, and they are always dangerous if taken in fairly large quantities. 
But if, on the other hand, you feel a pleasant feeling of warmth coming over you during your meditations you may be sure that there are present with you some benevolent forces or entities, and you should continue your meditations with confidence. 
But one word of warning! The moment you see, hear or sense anything, do not start with surprise; for if you do this you destroy conditions at once. Whatever happens — keep calm; do not reason or speculate on what occurs, but take careful mental notes, and when it is all over, then write everything down, lest you forget. Such happenings often contain a message for you, but if at first you do not understand the messages, symbols, pictures or sounds, wait; for in the end you will receive further ones which will clear everything up; and be patient in the meanwhile. Do not write to us about these things, asking us to interpret your messages, for there is no person on earth who can decipher any message received by another. Anyone who pretends to do this is using his imagination and gives his interpretation which can never be your own; and much harm can be done in this manner with the best intentions. 
And now we will tell you what we mean by 'entities'. These can be, in the case of the cold sensations, remains of the lower principles 
of the body of a human being, drifting about in the astral realms in the act of being slowly dissolved; and such are called 'elementaries'. Or they may be intelligent spiritual beings, though of a lower grade of evolution than man, dwelling in the first realm beyond the earth-plane and connected with the forces of the Moon. 
In the case of the warm sensations these 'entities' are the spirits of highly evolved human beings, dwelling in the fourth realm, the Golden Realm of the Sun; and they may be friends or relatives of your present or of a previous incarnation who are projecting their thoughts of love towards you. But do not fall into the same error as the Spiritualists and imagine that they are actually with you, and that they are present in the Earthly atmosphere, for that is most unlikely and can happen only in very exceptional cases, for the atmosphere of Earth, and its material conditions around it, are of such a dense, mephitical nature that the average human spirit of even the Fourth Plane or Realm cannot penetrate it. 
There is still another possibility in regard to the cold and warm sensations, and that is that you may be so highly evolved, pure and worthy, that one of the Great Messengers, those whom we might describe as 'Masters', is present with you in order to give you some instruction – via the Soul to the Higher Mind — or bring you some comfort, Peace or consolation if you should stand in need of it for any reason whatsoever. But it is best never to indulge ourselves with speculations of the latter nature, for there are very few who are honoured and blest in this manner. Whatever happens in your meditations – remain humble and grateful for the blessings of enlightenment you have received, or for the boon of comfort and Peace. If we do not act in this way we are in danger of becoming filled with pride; and you probably know the saying of Thomas à Kempis; “If your mind and its affections be pure, and sincere, and moderate, nothing shall have the power to enslave you." It is also said that the humble enjoy continual Peace, but in the heart of the proud is envy, and frequent indignation. Avoid the latter evils, for "The true, strong, and sound mind is the mind that can embrace equally great things and small”, as Johnson has declared. 
You will now realise that this Lecture contains instructions for a new exercise, or an old one in a different way: that of Meditation. 
May your contemplations bring you Peace and Truth. 
Your Hidden Master. 
