SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 37. 

Dear Disciple, 
In the second chapter of Genesis, verse seven, we read: "And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul”. 
Now those breaths of life, first in one nostril and then in the other, are said to correspond with the Sun-breath for the right nostril, and Moon-breath for the left. Likewise the, at that time double-sexed, man's right half of the body was male (positive-Sun), and the left half female (negative-Moon); and this form lasted until the two ‘halves' were reincarnated as semi-complete beings having only one sex, male or female; as mankind is formed today. 
Man, being a Son of God, is made to pass through the school of life - until he has learnt the lessons of the material. As an inhabitant of Heaven, before he ever descends to Earth he is passionless, pure and mindless. He has no struggles, no passions to crush, and by mindless is meant: without experience.
As it says in the ancient Teachings: “The best of us in future will be those spiritual beings who belong to the creative Hierarchy from which the Logoi of a future Kosmos may spring; the lowest will become 'fore-fathers', like the Angels who descended to Earth and married human women”. (Of course the two above-mentioned classes consist of those who have not lost their heavenly birthright by casting away all virtue and goodness and descended to the lower realms). 
“We are seven intellectual Hierarchies here. This Earth becomes the Moon of the next Earth”. Such are the Teachings. As a Moon, the earth will repeat the history of all moons; and at the beginning of the evolution of our globe the Moon was much nearer to the earth, and larger than it is now. The Moon gave all her Principles to the Earth, while its lower Lords gave only their shadows to Man. 
The influences of the Moon are wholly Psycho-physiological; the Moon is a dead body, as we hinted before, sending out injurious emanations like a corpse. It is like a vampire to the earth and its inhabitants, drawing out some of the life forces from those who sleep in its rays. If one should have to do this, then a white cloth covering the head especially, acts as a protection. The Moon has most power when full, of course, and throws off particles which we absorb. Where there is snow, as on snow-covered mountains, the Moon is powerless. Apart from all the above the Moon is also phosphorescent, Plants which are beneficent under the rays of the Sun, become maleficent under those of the Moon; and herbs containing poison are most active when gathered under the Moon's rays. 
The parts of the body affected mainly by the Moon are the breasts, the left eye, the fluidic system (saliva, lymph, etc.,) and the Moon's colour is white. But esoterically its colour is violet, for violet is the colour assumed by a ray of sunlight when transmitted through a very thin silver plate, and silver is the metal most in sympathy with the Moon. Further, the Moon shines upon the earth with light borrowed from the Sun; the same as the human body shines with qualifications borrowed from its astral double, the so-called aerial man. The body also shines with the light projected through it outwardly by the Higher Mind. The man whose Higher Mind is highly evolved shines with a light such as we see, in pictures, around the head of the Lord Jesus. "Hide not your light under a bushel” is a warning not to allow the gross material nature of your lower mind, or body, to obscure that divine radiance which the Higher Mind attains by attuning with the divine Soul — which is a gleaming Flame. 
And now — 
what about the Path to the Moon? 
From our foregoing Lectures, from Number 27 onwards, you must have already a fairly accurate picture of that Path. 
Let us, however, first refer to a very tiny portion of the Egyptian ‘Book of the Dead', in other words "The Book of the dead Man' as its title is in reality. The Ancient Egyptian title of these texts was 'Pert em Hru' which means 'coming forth from Day'. The significance of this will become clear as we develop our theme. 
Neither the old Aryan nor the Egyptian psychology is now properly understood; nor can they be assimilated without acceptance of the Esoteric septenary Principle of man's sevenfold nature. If we fail to do this it will be for ever impossible to understand the metaphysical and purely psychic, and even the physiological relations between the inhabitants on the Seven Planes of Existence and Man. In the Egyptian papyri there is a clear statement about the seven principles, or 'Seven Souls of Man'. 
The Book of the Dead gives a complete list of the transformations that every so-called 'Defunct' undergoes while divesting himself, one by one, of all these principles - materialised for the sake of clearness into ethereal entities or bodies. Yet it must be remembered that the 
laking off of these principles, or bodies, takes place only when the entity has reached the highest possible state of spiritual evolution. Most human beings only succeed in slaking off one of these principles after a while they return again to assume a new human shape. 
But we must also state emphatically that the Ancient Egyptians did not deny reincarnation when they say that the 'Soul', the Ego or Self of the Defunct is said to be living in Eternity, and that it is immortal, coeval with, and disappearing with the “Solar Boať, This ‘Soul emerges from the TIAOU, the Realm of the Cause of Life, and joins the living on Earth by day, to return to Tiaou every night. This expresses the periodical existences of the human Ego — or Higher Mind!! 
Each day is an incarnation, each night a return to the Tiaou. The Earth gives man his body, the Gods give him his five principles, and the psychic shadow – of which the 'Gods' are the animating Principle, is that Higher Mind — one-half of the Soul. Thus we arrive at the seven principles of man. But the Spirit, the positive part of the Soul-Mind, in other words the Soul itself, is not in Man; nor is it in the Tiaou! 
Now what is the Tiaou (also written as 'Duať or 'Tuať)? 
It is said that the frequent allusion to it in the Book of the Dead contains a mystery. This is true; for it is a mystery to those who cannot read the real meaning of it, for, as we said in one of our earlier lectures, there are three ways of reading and understanding the Ancient Egyptian writings. 
Let us therefore explain that the Tiaou is the PATH of the Night-Sun, the inferior hemisphere, which the Egyptians called the 'infernal region', in order to conceal its true meaning; and they placed that sphere on the concealed side of the Moon, to which leads the Path that all must tread who are due for another incarnation in times to come. 
According to Egyptian Esotericism - and correctly - the human being, as far as half his spiritual part is concerned (the Higher Mind) came out from the Moon. This is at once a triple mystery, astronomical, physiological and psychical. The human entity crossed the complete cycle of existence, and then returned to his birthplace, before issuing from it once more. 
Thus the Defunct is shown arriving in the West, receiving the judgement of Osiris, resurrecting as the God Horus, and circling round the sidereal heavens, which is an allegorical assimilation to Ra, the Sun. 
Then having crossed the Noot (or Nut), the Celestial Abyss, he returns once more to the Tiaou, the Path; an assimilation to Osiris, who, as the God of life and reproduction abides in the Moon. 
Plutarch speaks of the Egyptians celebrating a festival known as “The Ingress of Osiris into the Moon'. In the Mystic Ritual life is promised after death; and the renovation of life is placed under the patronage of Osiris-Lunus, because the Moon was the symbol of life-renewals or re-incarnations, owing to its growth, waning, dying, and reappearance every month. 
In the Dankmoe it is said: "Oh, Osiris-Lunus, that renews to thee thy renewal”. 
And Sabekh says to Seti: “Thou renewest thyself as the God Lunus, when a babe”. 
Osiris was ‘God manifest in generation', for the Ancients knew, far better than the moderns, the real Occult influences of the Lunar Body upon the mysteries of conception. 
In the Ancient Wisdom it is said that: “The Thread between the Silent Watcher (the Soul) and his Shadow (the Higher Mind) becomes more strong and radiant with every change”. 
This is as it should be. With every change (into a new human body) we should gather new experiences and Wisdom, until at last "The Morning Sun-light has changed into noon-day Glory”. 
“Mind is dual”, “Lunar is the lower, Solar is its upper portion”, it has been taught. In other words — once again - the Higher Mind is Lunar and negative, the Soul is Solar and Positive; and the end and aim of us all is to blend the two into an insoluble perfection. Then we have finished with the Path of the Moon, and we proceed straight to the Sun-Path, and onwards to the Divine Spheres of God's Higher Mansions. “In my Father's House are many Mansions”. This saying will now become very clear to you all in the light of our previous lectures. Each Realm is full of Mansions. Each plane above can be full of delight, even that of the Moon. It is not a place of punishment or gloom if we have been decent citizens and acted for the best in all circumstances. To return to Earth is the same as going to school, and the more we attend to our lessons the quicker shall we proceed to a ‘higher class'. 
We may have a large number of incarnations and proceed no further than the First Plane above after each life. But the time will come when we have earned the rewards of the next Plane, and when, after many incarnations, we have finished with the Second Plane above, or beyond the Earth too, then comes the time when we proceed to the Fourth Realm, or the third above the Earth, from whence we need return no more. 
The way to Planes Numbers One and Two above, then, are reached by way of the Path to the Moon, The next Plane is reached by way of the Path to the Sun. This we shall discuss in our coming Lectures. 
May we all see the Glory of that Divine Realm at the end of our next journey. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
