SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 39. 

Dear Disciple, 
In Lectures 27-38 we have made frequent references to the Path of the Sun, and the Path of the Moon. What is this Path? You may well have asked yourself. Is it a Road, a Street, an Avenue, a Ladder leading to Heaven with Angels walking up and down it? (Although why they should walk, having wings to fly with, according to the story, we do not pretend to understand). 
The Ancient Teachings tell as follows. When a person who has evolved sufficiently to earn Heaven 'dies', the Soul, together with the Astral Body (in other words the Higher Mind with the astral body, according to our manner of dividing the two Principles of Soul and Higher Mind) goes from the heart of the body (the centre — not the aorta) to the suture at the crown of the head, from which the Higher Mind escapes after traversing the spinal cord. After it has broken through the top of the head it departs towards the Sun-Region — or Fourth Realm — by way of the Solar rays. On the way it passes through a dark spot in the Sun, but it is guided by the wisdom it has acquired by attuning with the Soul, and this attunement can be reached by practising restraint and forbearance, religious observances, and reaching out to all that is beautiful, wise and divine; control of the senses, or the lower mind, which in most persons controls the Higher Mind instead, thus turning it into a slave instead of a Master; by abstract contemplation; and by ecstatic meditation. 
In Sir Edwin Arnold's translation of the Bhagavad Gītā it says: 
“There be two paths Shown to this world; two schools of wisdom. First The Dankhya's which doth save in way of works Prescribed by reason; next, the Yög, which bids Attain by meditation spiritually; Yet these are one." 
This is true in every sense; for without WISDOM, the practice of control, attunement, meditation and so on, cannot have the desired results. We may meditate until we are blue in the face, but if we do not know the correct way to meditate, to practise good deeds, to attune with the divine and beautiful, and to control our lower body, we get nowhere at all; and this is the reason why you are studying the Occult Science your Masters teach! But Wisdom alone is no use either if you do not put it into practice! If you realise by a system of intellectual and abstract philosophy that the Universe evolves from substance and spirit the one non-existent save through the other; that differentiation' is but in the seeming, and that Deity, as Deity, is not recognised as a huge Male or Female dwelling in the heavens; or that the way of salvation for man lies in the knowledge of the One by means of the many; and that by means of the observance of certain principles man can eventually obtain liberation from the rounds of birth and deaths then you have learned a lot of Wisdom and Truth. But unless you can combine all this with good works and right conduct, similar to or the same as that just outlined above, you will not be liberated, but must return again to Earth until you have learned the Great Lesson. When you have learned it, then you will proceed to that Fourth Realm — as we said — and your own Soul (with which your Higher Mind has now blended) may be your Guide. Or there may be what are known as 'bearers in transit', generally your own kin and those whom you love and who love you, who will keep you company on the way. 
We may compare this Esoteric Tenet with the Gnostic Doctrine found in Pistis-Sophia, or KnowledgeWisdom, in which Sophia is shown as lost in the waters of Chaos (or Matter), on her way to the Supreme Light, the Christos delivering and helping her on the right Path. This is also a beautiful Teaching, and it may well happen thus in many cases. But we must also remember that in this case by 'Christos' the Gnostics meant 'Impersonal Principle', the Soul of the Universe, and the Soul connected with every Man's Higher Mind and not Jesus the Christ (though in the Coptic manuscript of the Pistis-Sophia in the British Museum, ‘Christos' is replaced by “Jesus' and other terms.) 
In one of the sacred books of the East there is one sentence which reads; “Reach the Fourth Fruit of the Fourth Path of Knowledge that leads to Nirvana, and thou shalt comprehend, for thou shalt see.” This is a direct reference to that Fourth Realm of the Sun we have mentioned so often; for there you will comprehend all things that are now mysterious and hidden, and you will see — THE GLORY!! 
Previous to the just quoted sentence come two others; "Make thy calculations, O Lanoo, if thou wouldst learn the correct age of thy Small Wheel. Its fourth Spoke is our Mother”. 
The 'Small Wheel' referred to is our Planetary System, whirling round the Sun, its nave; and the Fourth Spoke' is our Earth, the fourth in the chain of planets. It is one of those 'Spokes' on which the positive and life-giving Breath of the Sun has a direct effect (although here again we are confronted with a mystery that will be explained in due course). 
In one of our very early lectures we referred you to 'The Breath of God', by drawing your attention to the countless atoms you inhale with each breath, to send them forth again on a new round when you exhaled again. The same applies to the Universe, manifesting periodically, for the purpose of the collective progress of the countless lives, the out-breathings of the One Life; in order that through the Ever-Becoming every Cosmic Atom in this infinite Universe, passing from the formless, the inexperienced, and the intangible, through the mixed natures of the semi-terrestrial, down to Matter in full generation, and then back again; reascending at each new period or birth higher and higher and nearer the final goal; so that each atom may reach, through individual merits and efforts, the Plane or Realm where it re-becomes the One Unconditioned ALL — laden with experience, goodness (having known evil, and realising the great difference), and Wisdom. But between the descent and the ascent there stretches a weary road, hedged in by thorns, that goes down first, then: 
“Winds up hill all the way; Yes, to the very end......" 
Commencing its long journey as an immaculate, spiritual entity, or atom, descending deeper and deeper into ‘sinful' matter (because sin is ignorance personified — and therefore sinful), and having connected himself with every atom in manifested Space, the Pilgrim, after struggling through and suffering in every form of Life and Being, is now only at the bottom of the valley, and half way through his cycle, when at last he has identified himself with collective Humanity. And now he must ascend the weary uphill path of the Golgotha of Life in the martyrdom of self-conscious existence; erring, erring all the way; until at last he sees the far-beckoning Beacon of Holy Light, and strives with all his might towards it — or turns away, and sinks in the wilderness of utter darkness, to become perhaps a 'lost Soul'. 
The ancient Initiates, followed more or less closely by all profane Antiquity, meant by the term Atom a Soul; a Genius or Angel, the first born of the ever-concealed Cause of all causes; and even Epicurus, the model Atheist and Materialist, knew so much of and believed so much in the Ancient Wisdom that he taught that the Soul (the Higher Mind) -entirely distinct from immortal Spirit (that which we call the Soul), was composed of a fine, tender essence, formed from the smoothest, roundest and finest atoms. In other words, the Soul is absolute Purity, the Higher Mind that principle which must 'cleanse itself in order to become worthy to join the Soul and become one with it. 
It is taught that: “The One Cosmic Atom becomes seven Atoms on the Plane of Matter (thus conforming to the sevenfold nature of Spirit), and each is transformed into a centre of Energy (the sevenfold principles of Man referred to in a previous lecture); that same atom becomes seven rays on the Plane of Spirit” (For Spirit being sevenfold manifests on seven Planes). 
It was at the period of highest civilisation and knowledge, and also of human intellectuality, during the time of Atlantis, owing to a crisis of the physiologico-spiritual adjustment of the Races, that humanity branched off into two diametrically opposed paths: the Right-hand and Left-hand Paths of Knowledge of Good and Evil. “Thus”, say the old Teachings, “were the germs of the White and the Black Magic sown in those days”. 
There were four paths of knowledge; 
(1). Gaining Wisdom by the due observance of ritualistic rites. 
(2). Magic, or Occult Knowledge; of which the highest White 
Initiates alone were in possession, which embraces almost universal knowledge, or OCCULT SCIENCE. 
(3). Esoteric knowledge — especially the esoteric knowledge of 
what is now known as 'Mantras' — form of words or syllables rhythmically arranged, so that when sounded certain vibrations are generated, producing a desired effect on higher planes. (Do not confuse this with 'affirmations'). 
(4). Spiritual Wisdom. 
But it is only the last which can throw final and absolute Light upon the Teachings of the three first-named. 
There were three classes of sages in Atlantis. They were the Royal Adepts, kings and princes who adopted the ascetic life; the divine Adepts, or the exponents of moral and religious duty, justice, right and orderly action, virtue and wisdom; and the descendants of those great Sages who were the founders of Atlantis, and its great teachers of the Arts and Sciences. We can see a distant reflection of these in the Rajarshis, Devarshis and Brāhmarshis of Ancient India, and we should always bear in mind that almost every ancient king and priest was an Initiate, and that there was a constant feud between those of the Right-hand Path and the Sorcerers of the Left. We should also bear in mind that when Ezekiel speaks of the nether parts of the earth' that they are in fact the bottom of the ocean, whose floor gaped wide devour the Land of Atlantis, together with its inhabitants with few exceptions. For by comparing the various accounts one will find that chapters 28 and 31 of Ezekiel do not relate to Babylon, Assyria or Egypt, since none of them have been destroyed by sending them to the bottom of the ocean, or to any low-lying part of the earth one could call ‘nether', but that they have simply fallen into ruins on the surface. Indeed he refers to Atlantis and most of its nations. And it will be realised also that the ‘Garden of Eden' of the Initiates was no myth, but a locality now submerged. When Ezekiel says: "All the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon comforted in the nether parts of the earth. (For) they also went down into hell with him”. 'Him', is supposed to be Pharaoh, but the only Pharaoh whom the Bible shows going down into the Red Sea was the King who is supposed to have pursued the Israelites, and this King remained unnamed, for very good reasons perhaps, the story was made up undoubtedly from the Atlantean legend. 
An Occultist will appreciate a sentence such as the following at its true value: “Thou hast been in Eden; thou wast upon the Holy Mountain of God”. For every nation had, and many still have, holy mountains, such as the Himālayan Peaks, and Parnassus and Sinai. Such were all places of initiation and the abodes of the chiefs of the communities of ancient and even modern Adepts. There are many such sentences to be found by the seeker, and Mount Pico (in the Azores) was the holy mountain of the initiates of ancient Atlantis; one of the few remnants of that continent still above the waves today. 
And now we have arrived at the completion of our third triangle of — the first Pyramid of Wisdom we are building together. Although we have not done with our study of the Path to the Sun (which will be continued in our next lectures) you will have realised by now the great heights of real Occult Wisdom we have reached, although we have completed only three-fourths of our First Grade. Your Masters trust that you have found much during the last three months in the way of hidden Wisdom contained in these lectures; for there is perhaps a great deal in them which is not so very obvious at a first (or even a tenth) reading. You may now write and ask us any question with regard to the Path of the Moon, if you have any to ask. But it will be, in any case, a pleasure to hear from you, and we should like your general impressions at any rate. 
May the Lords of Light and Goodness keep and protect you. 
Your Hidden Master. 
