SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 35. 
Dear Disciple, 
Soma, the Moon, is the Mystery God who presides over the mystic and occult nature in man and the Solar System. In the Ancient Teachings it is said: “The Men of the Lord of Wisdom (Budha, not Gautama Buddha, and Mercury), not the Sons of Soma, are Immortal". In this bald statement we find the whole of the Laws of the Path to the Moon; only those who have found Wisdom shall be Immortal; in other words: they will die no more, nor will they have to re-incarnate. As long as we are entangled in the Web of the Mystery God and have not learnt to realise his illusions we dwell in ignorance – a Sin, because it leads to rebirth. Once the portals of the true Sun of Enlightenment have been opened we may proceed through the Gates of Light and dwell in its Radiance. 

If you can obtain a copy of the first “War in Heaven”, the "Tārakāmaya', you will be able to trace therein the biographies of all the Planets by the history of their Gods and Rulers. Ushanas (Shukra, or Venus), the bosom friend of Soma and the foe of Brihaspati (Jupiter), the 'Instructor of the Gods', whose wife Tārā, or Tārakā, had been carried away by the Moon, Soma, "of whom he begat Budha”, took an active part in this war against the 'Gods' and was forthwith degraded into a Demon (Asura) Deity, and so he remains to this day. Ushanas-Shukra, or Venus, is our Lucifer, the morning-star, of course. The ingenuity of the allegory in its manifold meanings is great indeed. Thus Brihaspati, or Brāhamanaspati (the Planet Jupiter), is, in the Rig Veda, a deity who is the symbol and the prototype of the exoteric or ritualistic worship. He is priest, sacrificer, suppliant and the medium through whom the prayers of mortals reach the Gods. Tārā, the priest's wife, who symbolises the worshipper, prefers Esoteric Truths to their mere shell, exotericism; hence she is shown as carried off by Soma. Now Soma is the sacred juice of the plant of that name, giving mystic visions and trance revelations, the result of the union of Tārā and Soma is Budha, or Wisdom, Mercury, Hermes, and so on; that Science, in short, which to this day is proclaimed by the ‘Brihaspatis' of Theology as Devilish and Satanic. 

What wonder that by expanding the cycle of this allegory we find Christian Theology espousing the quarrel of the Hindu Gods, and regarding Ushanas (Lucifer), who helped Soma against that ancient personification of ritualistic worship (Brāhmanaspati) the Lord of the Brāhmans, (now become Jupiter-Jehovah) as Satan, the 'Enemy of God'! 

We have told you about the worship of the cat in Egypt in connect ion with the Moon. The Goddess Bast (or Basht) of Egypt — a most dreaded figure — was represented with the head of a cat. One of the reasons why the cat was held sacred in Egypt was this: because its body was rolled up in a circle when it slept. This posture is prescribed for Occult and magnetic purposes, in order to regulate, in a certain way, the circulation of the vital fluid with which the cat is pre eminently endowed; vide its 'nine lives'! “Deus enim et circulus est”, says Pherecydes, in his Hymn to Jupiter. This was also a Hermetic axiom, and Pythagoras prescribed such a circular prostration and posture during the hours of contemplation. You may try this, if you wish, and take note of the sensation of warmth that pervades the whole body after the first few minutes. The 'Secret Book' instructs: "The devotee must approach as much as possible the form of a perfect circle” (lying down sideways of course). Numa tried to spread the same custom among the people, we are told by Pierius; and Pliny says: “During our worship, we roll up, so to say, our body in a ring — totum corpus circumagimur.” 
The vision of the Prophet Ezekiel reminds one forcibly of this mysticism of the circle, when he beheld a "whirlwind” from which came out “one wheel in the middle of a wheel” — “for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels." 
(Spirit) “whirleth about continually, and — returneth again according to his circuits” — says Solomon, who is made in the English translation to speak of the 'wind', while in the original text he is made to refer to the spirit and the Sun. 
And the “Zohar' explains it as follows: “It seems to say that the Sun moves in circuits, whereas it refers to the Spirit under the Sun, called the Holy Spirit, that moves circularly, towards both sides, that they (it and the Sun) should be united in the same Essence". And that is the ultimate destiny of the Spirit of Man too; to tread the Sun-Path and be united with the Essence of the Holy Spirit. 
In the Ancient Scriptures we read that “The Great Chohans (Lords) called the Lords of the Moon, of the Airy Bodies, (and said): ‘Bring forth Men, Men of your Nature. Give them their Forms within'." 
Who are the 'Lords of the Moon?' In India they are called Pitris or 'Lunar Ancestors', but in the Hebrew scrolls collectively as the Hosts, and also as one of the Elohim. The Astronomy of the Hebrews and their 'observance of times' was regulated by the Moon. It has been shown that “Daniel told of God's providence by set times", and that the Revelation' of John speaks of “a carefully measured cubical city Jaccending out of the Heavens”, and it is added: “The vitalising power of heaven lay chiefly with the Moon.” — It was the Hebrew Jehovah. and St. Paul enjoins: “Let no man judge you for your observance of the seventh day, and the day of new moon, which are a shadow of things to come; but the body (or substance) is of Christ”, i.e., Jehovah, that function of this power that "made the barren woman the joyful mother of children", "for they are the gift of Jehovah.” In this we have a key to the objection which the husband made to the Shunamite, as to her going to the man of God: "for it is neither the 7th day nor the day of new moon." 
The living spiritual powers of the constellations had mighty wars marked by the movements and positions of the stars and planets, and especially as the result of the conjunction of the moon, earth and Sun. Bentley comments on the Hindu "war between the gods and the giants”, as marked by the eclipse of the Sun at the ascending node of the Moon. And Sarai (Sri), the wife of Abram, could have no child until her name was changed to Sarah, giving to her the property of the Lunar influence. In this last sentence lies a mystery, but we cannot develop it here as there is no space for it in our First Grade. 
It is on the number seven that Pythagoras composed his Doctrine on the Harmony and Music of the Spheres, calling a 'tone' the distance of the Moon from the Earth; from the Moon to Mercury half-a-tone; from Mercury to Venus the same; from Venus to the Sun one-and-a-half tones; from the Sun to Mars a tone; from Mars to Jupiter half-a-tone; from Jupiter to Saturn half-a-tone; and from Saturn to the Zodiac half a-tone; thus making six tones, the diapason harmony. All the melody of Nature is in those six tones of seven notes, and it is therefore called the 'Voice of Nature'. This is of great interest on account of the fact that modern Science has discovered lately that within the rays of the Moon there rings the note E. 
If we develop this on the basis of the Pythagorean doctrine we obtain the following result: 
Earth 
Moon Mercury 
Venus 
Sun 
Zodiac 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Saturn 

This forms an extra-ordinary Scale, which, in the hands of a Composer of Genius might produce some strange results. Any of our students who are professional musicians will note that the tone for Por is the note C, which is also the key in which Mozart's Jupiter Fonhony is composed. This is all the more interesting as Mozart was e most sublime, ethereal and refined composer of all times. He has neon called 'the aristocrat of Music', and that he was definitely in attunement with the finer and higher spheres of the Divine Realms is evidenced in the fact that he had the ability to see great musical works in the form of a brilliant beam of light, in which sounded in one gigantic chord the whole of such great compositions as he gave forth to the world. We might add that the Pythagorean system of the Music of the Spheres was based on the Triangle and the Cross. 
If any of our students possess copies of the Egyptian 'Books of Thoth', such as 'The Teachings of Hermes', 'The Divine Pymander', 'The Virgin of the World', 'The Book of the Dead', or the Hindu 'Purānas' with their Seven Manus, they should study them in the light of our teachings, for they are veritable mines of secret and sacred lore. We shall refer to them from time to time as we proceed, in which case they will prove very useful if the students can look up the texts for themselves, and read what precedes and follows any of our references. Many of the above titles have been reprinted in recent times and should not be difficult to obtain. We also recommend the Kabalah in some good edition such as by Isaac Myer or Franck. 
Back 
The seven souls (that which we call Principles) are often mentioned in the Egyptian texts. The moon-god, Taht-Esmun, or the later Sun-God, expressed the seven nature-powers that were prior to himself. The seven stars in the hand of the Christ in Revelation have the same significance. 
It simply means that every time the Higher Mind incarnates it becomes, as a total, a compound unit of Matter and Spirit, and this unit acts on seven different planes of consciousness while in the human body. The number seven — as you may have noticed already, is of the utmost importance in our studies, and we shall give you all the known and unknown meanings, interpretations and applications of it in a gradual manner. There are seven planets, seven Sons of God, seven regions of the Earth, seven planes above and below, and a host of other ‘sevenings' in God's Universe - but these have, for the time being, nothing to do with Numerology, which at present is entirely misunderstood and misrepresented. 

With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 

