SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 1. Number 36. 

Dear Disciple, 

Masoudí, the Arabian historian, transcribed from the Chaldean a treatise which later on —in 1860 was re-translated by the Russian Jewish orientalist, Chwolsohn, under the title of "Nabathean Agriculture'. In the opinion of the latter translator that archaic volume is a complete initiation into the mysteries of the Pre-Adamite nations, on the authority of undeniably authentic documents. It is an invaluable compendium, the full epitome of the doctrines, arts and sciences of not only the Chaldeans, but also of the Assyrians and Canaanites of the pre-historic ages. 
Masoudi says; “After the Deluge (and that there was at least a local deluge has been proved by the excavations at Ur by Sir Leonard Woolley) the nations established themselves in various countries”; please note the word 'nations' – there is no question here of Noah and his family being the sole survivors, for the true Deluge took place hundreds of thousands of years ago. 
Among these ‘nations' were the Nabatheans (or Nabatæans), who founded the city of Babylon, and were those descendants of 'Ham' who settled in the same province under the leadership of Nimrod, the son of Cush, who was the son of Ham and the great-grandson of ‘Noah'. 
It has been suggested that this book is a copy of one made under Nebuchadnezzar II from some Hamitic treatise, infinitely more ancient, but the author maintains on internal and external evidence, that its Chaldean original was written out from the oral discourses and teachings of a wealthy Babylonian landowner, named Qū-tāny, who had used very ancient materials for it. The first Arabic translation dates back to the 13th Century B.C. On the first pages Qū-tāny declares that the doctrines propounded therein were originally told by Saturn to the Moon, who communicated them to her 'idol', and the idol revealed them to her devotee — the writer – the Adept scribe of that work, namely Qū-tāny. The details given by the God, Saturn, for the benefit and instruction of mortals, show periods of incalculable duration, and a series of numberless Kingdoms and Dynasties that preceded the appearance on Earth of Adami — the “red-earth'. 
A furious quarrel commenced, and De Rougemont was the first to start the attack on the translator, whom he reproached with sacrificing Moses to anonymous authors, and Renan went as far as to suggest that the book was a fraudulent work of some Jew of the third or fourth Century A.D. 
We mention this in passing, for it shows a strange trait in humanity, namely, that few want to know the Truth! Therefore the work was dismissed as "a fairy-tale all round”. But if that were true the Bible would be a fairy-tale also, for the mode of divination “through the idol of the Moon” mentioned in the book, is the same as that practised by David, Saul and the High Priest of the Jewish Tabernacle by means of the Teraphim. 
But the truth of the matter is that the book contains but a repetition of the tenets of the secret Teachings under the exoteric form of national symbols, for the purpose of cloaking the tenets, just as the Book of Hermes, and the Purānas are like attempts by the Egyptians and the Hindus. Moreover, the work was as well known in antiquity as it was during the Middle Ages. It is mentioned by Maimonides, and he refers often to this Chaldæo-Arabic manuscript, calling the Nabatheans by the name of their co-religionists, the 'star-worshippers', or Sabeans, but yet failing to see in the disfigured word 'Nabathean' the mystic name of the caste devoted to Nebo, the God of Secret Wisdom, which shows that the Nabatheans were an Occult Brotherhood. Maimonides says: “I will mention to thee the writings — respecting the belief and institutions of the Sabeans. The most famous is the Book: 'The Agriculture of the Nabatheans' which has been translated by Ibn Wahohijah. This book is full of heathenish foolishness — It speaks of preparations of Talismans, the drawing down of powers of the Spirits, Magic, Demons, and Ghouls, which make their abode in the desert." 
The Nabatheans of Mount Lebanon believed in seven Archangels, as their forefathers had believed in the Seven Great Stars, the abodes and bodies of these Archangels, which are believed in to this day by the Roman Catholics. 
We have referred previously to the Soma plant, the Asclepias Acida, from the juices of which comes the sacred beverage which is drunk by the Brahmans and the Initiates during their mysterious and sacrificial rites. The descendants of the Rishis, the Agnihotris, or Fire Priests of the Great Mysteries, alone knew all its powers. But the real property of the true Soma was and is to make a 'new man' of the Initiate, after he is ‘reborn', namely once that he begins to live in his Astral Body, for, his spiritual nature overcoming the physical, he could — if he wished — snap it off and part from even the Astral Form. The partaker of Soma finds himself linked to both his external body and yet away from his spiritual form, or Astral Body. Freed from the human body to a certain extent and altogether free from the astral body he soars for the time being in the ethereal higher Regions (beyond the Earth Realm), becoming virtually as one of the Gods, and yet reserving in his physical brain the memory of what he sees and Tearns. This memory may even be what is called 'sub-conscious' and may manifest in inspired writings or in oratory. It may take the form of prophecy, art in any form, discovery and invention, in short, it is impossible to say how this memory will work out in each individual. Plainly speaking, Soma is the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, forbidden by the jealous Elohim to Adam and Eve — or Yah-eve, “lest man should become as one of us”. 
But by practising the exercises we have given you all, so far, and, after you have mastered them, or should have, by adding new ones to them, you may all obtain the same freedom as that given by that potent drug — without any harm to yourself — and if you wish it. 
We must also make it clear that although you may be willing to ‘snap the thread' which binds the Higher Mind to the lower in the form of the human body, or the astral body, you will not be able to do this unless the Lords of Destiny decide that it is the right time for your Higher Mind to pass on to another plane. And, as for 'snapping the thread' between the astral body and the Higher Mind – that is permitted only to those who have finished with both the Path of the Moon and that which is known as the Path of the Sun. Only the Highest and most pure and wise initiates can do this at will, for it means that they leave for ever all the four lower spheres of the Higher Realms, thus proceeding to the fifth, from which no one returns to Earth, unless it is by special command and in order to Create a new Race on a planet, or dwell amongst those already so created, like the Angels who descended to this planet and 'took’ the daughters of Man, in order to teach them and to 'awaken' their Higher Minds within them and in their joint progeny. But this is a great mystery which cannot be explained yet. Let it be sufficient to say that in the Ancient Teachings it is said that: “The first were the Sons of Yoga”. They were the Sons of the Sun and the Moon, the nurselings of Ether, or the 'Wind', which is the Breath of Life. Those were the 'Shadows' of the Lords; for at first they had no (physical) substance. Then they were clothed by the 'Spirits of the Earth'; they were given a body. They were 'warmed' by the Solar Lhas (the Solar Spirits), and this means that within them was placed the Spark of Life; taken from the everlasting and undiminishable Hidden Holy Flame of the Unknown Logos. “The Breaths (creations in the shape of men) had life, but no understanding”. 
This is why the Angels came down to Earth as explained above. The “One Thing", mentioned in the Tabula Smaragdina of Hermes, is Man; although there are seven keys to its Esoteric meaning, of which V is one. For it is said in the Emerald Tablet of Hermes that: “The Father of that one Holy Thing is the Sun; its Mother the Moon; the Wind carries it in its bosom (and it carries in its bosom the Wind, or Breath of Life), and its nurse is the Spirituous Earth”. And there should be added: "And spiritual Fire is its Instructor and Keeper”, for without that sacred Flame the frame is dead. And the 'Flame' has three meanings; it is at once the 'Spark of Life' which keeps the body warm; it is the Higher Mind, which is part of the Soul, both One Flame, but separated as regards its negative Principle (the Higher Mind) which dwells within the living body (human or astral), partaking of its nature until it has conquered the human senses, and its positive part (the Soul) which dwells in utter purity without the living human or astral body, keeping it company, guiding and guarding it — if the Higher Mind will but listen — as we have hinted at before but cannot emphasise too much. Thus the three together, with the Astral Body attending them always, and the human body sometimes (when the Spark and Higher Mind enter it at birth, together with the Breath), until even the Astral vehicle is required no longer and the Ego takes refuge in the All-Spirit and merges into the Essence thereof — without losing its conscious individuality in a way we may not even hint at yet. That which urges ever forward and forces evolution until perfection is reached is that Soul, the Monad, as it is called by the Teachers. And woe to the Higher Mind that will not listen but turns wilfully to the lower realms; for there lies the true perdition. 
One European writer has said: “We modern Europeans feel surprised when hearing talk of the Spirits of the Sun, Moon, etc. But we repeat again, the natural good sense and the upright judgement of the Ancient peoples, quite foreign to our entirely material ideas of mechanics and physical sciences — could not see in the stars and planets anything but simple masses of light, or opaque bodies moving in circuits in sidereal space, merely according to the laws of attraction and repulsion; they saw in them living bodies, animated by spirits as they saw the same in every kingdom in nature. This doctrine of spirits, so consistent and conformable to nature, from which it was derived, formed a grand and unique conception wherein the physical, the moral, and the political aspects were all blended together.” 
The writer of that paragraph was not a mystic, but a man with great intuition who was almost unacquainted with the Aryan Hindu Philosophies, and he gives an unbiased and reasoned opinion, well worth considering. It is such a conception only that can lead a man to form a correct conclusion about his origin and the genesis of everything in the Universe — of Heaven and Earth. “Without such a psychological link, and the feeling of its presence” — says another writer — “no Science can over progress, and the realm of knowledge must be limited to the analysis of physical matter only”. 
Occultists believe in ‘spirits’, but not those of the Spiritualists, because they feel — and some see — themselves surrounded by them on every side. Materialists do not — yet — and they are to be pitied for their present loss of beauty. They might be regarded as living on Earth in the same manner as some creatures live, as insects or even fishes live, surrounded by myriads of their own genus, without seeing or sensing them. And those beings who dwell on Higher Planes are still of our own genus, though one or more steps removed, and to see and hear them in their splendour is happiness and beauty indeed. 
May this boon be yours, 
Your Hidden Master. 
