

So far, then, we have dimly apprehended the Absolute as the One and All, the First Logos as a primal emanation, emanating in turn the Second Logos, wherefrom is evolved the substance and life of the Kosmos, in Esoteric parlance the Third Logos. But for the completion of this ‘« beginning of things”, is needed the differentiation of something more than substance and life: ideation must precede formation. And so, from the Logos “ emanate the seven .. . . Dhyani Buddhas, called the Anupadaka, ‘ the parentless’. These Buddhas are the primeval monads from the world of tncorporeal being, the Arupa [rupa, form, a, without] world” (vol. i. p. 571). These seven are, collectively, Mahat or Intelligence, the Universal World Soul, Cosmic Ideation, called also Maha-Buddhi (p 16). Collectively Cosmic Ideation or Mahat, they are manifested as seven intelligences, “ the primordial seven, the first seven breaths of the Dragon of Wisdom” (Stanza v.). They “produce in their turn” the “fiery whirlwind”, Fohat, the ‘« messenger of their will”; “he is the steed and the thought is the rider”; he is “ the potential creative power ”, ‘‘ the personified electric vital power ”. On the terrestrial plane he is electricity in the widest sense, the principle THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 57

manifesting in all electric and magnetic phenomena. “ By the action of the’ manifested Wisdom, or Mahat, represented by these innumerable centres of Spiritual Energy in the Kosmos, the reflexion of the Universal Mind—which is Cosmic Ideation and the intellectual force accompanying such Ideation—becomes objectively the Fohat of the Buddhist esoteric Philosopher. Fohat, running along the seven principles of Akasa, acts upon manifested substance or the One Element . . . . and by differentiat- ing it into various centres of Energy, sets in motion the law of Cosmic Evolution, which, in obedience to the Ideation of the Universal Mind, brings into existence all the various states of being in the manifested Solar System” (vol. i. p. 110).

From each of the Dhyani Buddhas, in the descending line, are thrown out, emanate, seven Bodhisattvas, and thus in unfolding sevenfold evolu- tion are produced centres, so to speak, of formative activity in Kosmos. From such a centre is evolved a ‘planetary chain”, or ring of seven globes, to be the theatre of the evolution of living things as we know them, the life-impulse having its source in that centre, and from it the evolutionary law its direction. From dawn to dusk of the Planetary Manvantara, pre- sides over all its changing phenomena this mighty and directive Energy, embodied in all forms yet essentially One.

At this point we pass from the Arupa world, the formless, the super- physical, into the world of forms, the reflexion in Space and Time of the One Reality. We will now concentrate our attention on a single planetary chain—naturally on that to which our own earth belongs—a sufficiently complicated evolution to follow, without confusing our thought by bringing in the surrounding chains, to say nothing of the surrounding solar systems.

Two STuDENTS oF THE E. S.

Note. It is certain that even on an elementary paper such as this some questions will arise in the minds of many who may read it. Some of those questions students will be able to solve by their own efforts; for it must be remembered that in Esotericism, even more than in any other study, no man can do his brother's thinking for him. Other questions may, however, refuse to be solved even after careful thinking; if such questions are sent to us, to the care of the Editors of Lucifer, 17 Lansdowne Road, Holland Park, W., we will do our best to answer them, or obtain answers for them, and such questions and answers on the preceding paper will be annexed to the following one.

80 S- 134 LUCIFER.

“ Who was that ?” I asked a workman next me.

‘No man here but ourselves,” was his answer, “ what are ye thinking of master?”

““Whisht !” said old Peter, ‘* They can’t see, but he was here for all that

—his last visit I’m thinking.” J. W. Bropie Innes, F.T.S. THe Enp.

ES SORES es.

Theosophical Gleanings,

NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”.

Il. Ay have seen in rough outline the earliest stages of Kosmogenesis, ° admirably summed up for us in the following brief statement :

‘‘Manvantaric impulse commences with the re-awakening of Kosmic Ideation (the ‘ Universal Mind ') concurrently with and parallel to the primary emergence of Kosmic Substance—the latter being the marnivantaric vehicle of the former—from its undifferentiated pralayic state. Then Absolute Wisdom mirrors itself in its Ideation; which by a transcendental process, superior to and incomprehensible by human consciousness, results in Kosmic Energy (Fohat). Thrilling through the bosom of inert Sub- stance, Fohat impels it to activity, and guides its primary differentiations on all the seven planes of Kosmic Consciousness. There are thus seven Protyles (as they are now called), while Aryan antiquity called them the seven Prakriti, or Natures, serving, severally, as the relatively homogeneous basis, which in the course of the increasing heterogeneity (in the evolution of the Universe) differentiate into the marvellous complexity presented by phenomena on the planes of perception.” (Vol. i. p. 328).

This primary sevenfold differentiation, as the “ light of eternity” rolls outward into objectivity, is repeated at each stage of the further evolution. ‘« By sevens" the building of the Universe proceeds. “ It is that Light which condenses in the forms of the ‘ Lords of Being '—the first and the highest of which are collectively Jivatma, or Pratyagd4tma. From these downwards —formed from the ever-consolidating waves of that light, which becomes on the objective plane gross matter—proceed the numerous hierarchies of the Creative Forces, some formless, others having their own distinctive forms, others, again, the lowest (Elementals), having no form of their own, but assuming every form according to the surrounding conditions. Thus there is but one Absolute Upadhi (basis) in the spiritual. sense, on and in which are built for Manvantaric purposes the countless basic centres on which proceed the universal, cyclic, and individual evolutions during the active period.” (Vol. ii, pp. 33, 34.)

These “countless basic centres” are, of course, subordinate to the “seven Laya centres” (Stanza vi.) connected with the Primordial Seven, the Dhyani Buddhas. Just as in the physical universe recognised by THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 135

science, our planets circle round “ the sun”, and many such solar systems as our own circle round a central “sun”, and many such aggregated sys- tems perchance again circle round some point central to them all; so Occult Kosmogenesis posits the primordial Seven Centres, the “ imperishable Laya Centres” produced by Fohat— The Great Breath digs through space seven holes into Laya to cause them to circumgyrate during Manvantara "” (vol. i p. 147)--and round these are other Laya (or Neutral) Centres, and round these yet others, and others again. The conception of a point central to all, and of secondary points central to divisional masses, and of tertiary points central to subdivisional masses, and so on in descending order, so that, to reverse the idea, each final sub-division has its own centre, and all such centres have thety common centre, and all these common centres fheir common centre, and so on, is one that we know to be true of the visible universe, however dizzy the attempt to realise it may make us. Anyone can figure the idea out with a pair of compasses, by drawing a number of small circles, each with its centre on the circumference of a larger circle, and all the centres of such larger circles on the circumference of a yet larger, extending his Kosmos until he is tired and dizzy; and if he makes them in groups of sevens, and goes on long enough, he will obtain a fairly clear idea of the relation of the basic centre of a planetary chain to one of the primordial Seven Laya Centres.

The planetary chain, evolved from such a subordinate centre, is a cycle of seven globes, and may be figured as situated on the arc of a circle (see Diagram IT. vol. i. p. 172), our earth, or any planet visible to us, being at the lowest point of the arc. These globes are, for convenience of reference, called by the names of the letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, G. The evolution impulse travels from globe A round to globe G, dwelling on each globe and then undergoing suspension, or pralaya ; and such a circling, with its seven periods of activity and seven periods of rest, is termed a Round. Seven such Rounds complete the Planetary Cycle, and are followed by the Planetary Pralaya. The observant student will notice that in the diagram the globes are arranged in pairs, with the exception of globe D; so that globes A and G occupy the same plane, as do globes B and F, and globes C and E. There is the descending arc, globes A, B, C; the midway or turning point, globe D; the ascending arc, globes E, F,G. The traveller must descend to win experience and self-consciousness, but his cycle is not complete until he re-ascends to the old position, bearing with him his spoils. But this figuring of the seven globes arranges them but on four, instead of on seven planes, the “ four lower planes of Kosmic consciousness”. The Diagram on p. 200 will solve the puzzle, for there the student will observe that the ‘three higher planes of the septenary Kosmos” belong to “ the Divine and Formless World of Spirit’, the Arupa World, spoken of in our last article, which is wholly above all such things as planetary chains.

Fohat, ‘‘the active force in Universal Life,” in one aspect Solar Energy, in another Electricity, whether Kosmic, solar, or human (see vol. 136 LUCIFER.

i, pp. 111, 112), is the “constructive power”, or force, which evolves the planetary chain. The ‘ Wheels” “are the centres of force around which primordial Kosmic matter expands, and, passing through all the six stages of consolidation, becomes spheroidal and ends by being transformed into globes or spheres” (vol. i. p. 116). The student will recognize “ this law of vortical movement in primordial matter” and will understand whence the Greek philosophers, initiates for the most part, drew their scientific teachings, teachings which Sir William Thomson echoes in his theories to- day. The details of this evolution are guided, according to the Secret Doctrine, by the beings who dwell on the higher planes, those earlier condensations of the Light spoken of above. The “ Builders”—as they are significantly termed—are divided into three classes, our planetary chain being the work of those belonging to the second class, while Humanity itself owes its fashioning to the third (vol. i. pp. 127, 128).

The next point to be grasped is the central idea of the Manvantaric and planetary cycles. Light seems to be thrown on this by two passages especially, although the same thought is glanced at over and over again.

“The Doctrine teaches that, in order to become a divine, fully conscious, God—aye, even the highest—the spiritual primeval INTELLIGENCES must pass through the human stage. And when we say human, this does not apply merely to our terrestrial humanity, but to the mortals that inhabit any world..... Each Entity must have won for itself the right of becoming divine, through self-experience. Hegel, the great German thinker, must have known or sensed intuitionally this truth when saying, as he did, that the Unconscious evolved the Universe only ‘in the-hope of attaining clear self-consciousness’, of becoming, in other words, Man; for this is also the secret meaning of the usual Puranic phrase about Brahm4& being constantly ‘moved by the desire to create’. This explains also the hidden Kabalistic meaning of the saying: ‘ The Breath becomes a stone; the stone, a plant; the plant, an animal; the animal,a man; the man,a spirit; and the spirit, a God’. The Mind-born Sons, the Rishis, the Builders, etc., were all men—of whatever forms and shapes—in other worlds and the preceding Manvantaras..... Every atom in the Universe has the potentiality of self-consciousness in it” (Vol. I., pp. 106, 107).

And again:

**A Dhyan Chohan has to become one; he cannot be born, or appear suddenly on the plane of life, as a full-blown angel. The’Celestial Hierarchy of the present Manvantara will find itself transferred in the next cycle of life into higher superior worlds, and will make room for a new hierarchy, composed of the elect ones of our mankind” (Vol. i. p. 221).
