
We have then presented to us the grandiose conception of a Universe evolving upwards, as a whole and in all its parts. Each cycle, minute or vast, is an evolution complete in itself, but forming part of a larger evolu- tion. So each cell in our body has its own circle of activity, its birth, growth, maturity, death; but each cell forms part of a tissue that also is born, grows, matures, dies; and each tissue forms part of an organ that is born, grows, matures, dies; and each organ helps to form a body that passes through similar stages; and so onwards, with races, worlds, systems, THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 137

Kosmos. The consciousness of the cell, for which the leading German scientists now contend, is not the consciousness of the brain of which it forms part, nor that of man the consciousness of the Kosmos; but shall the cell therefore deny consciousness to the brain, or man to the cell ?

Let us, then, commence our study of the evolution of the planetary chain and its inhabitants with the idée mére that spirit is to become self- conscious through that evolution, the evolution being guided by intelligences who have already passed through the human experience in a previous Manvantara. The sketch, given in Vol. i. pp 213221, of the seven chief ‘celestial hierarchies” is a picture of the inhabitants of higher planes in their relationship to terrestrial humanity, which will be more clearly under- stood at a later stage of our study. The highest, the ‘formless fiery breaths”, the ‘divine fire”, are collectively Atma, the universal spirit. The second, “Fire and ther”, are Atma-Buddhi, Buddhi, the divine soul, being the vehicle of Atma. The third symbolises the intellect, Manas, that with Atma-Buddhi gives Atma-Buddhi-Manas, the Triad. The fourth “are substantial Entities. This is the highest group among the Rupas (atomic forms). It is the nursery of the human, conscious, spiritual souls.” They are the ‘inner soul of the physical cell”, “ the spiritual potency in the

' physical cell that guides the development of the embryo, and which is the cause of the hereditary transmission of faculties, and all the inherent qualities in man”. The fifth group “is supposed to contain in itself the dual attributes of both the spiritual and physical aspects of the universe”. The sixth and the seventh groups are “conscious ethereal entities", including Nature-Spirits or Elementals of all kinds, sentient but not always intelligent beings. From the sixth of these groups man has to draw all but his highest principles and his physical body. The question is often asked whether Theosophists regard these “ hierarchies ” as composed of entities, or as being merely allegorical.

“To this the answer is given as plainly: ‘ After due allowance for the imagery of personified powers, we must admit the existence of these Entities, if we would not reject the existence of spiritual humanity within physical mankind. For the hosts of these Sons of Light and ‘¢ Mind-Born Sons” of the first manifested Ray of the Unknown ALL, are the very root of spiritual man.’ Unless we want to believe the unphilosophical dogma of a specially created soul for every human birth—a fresh supply of these pouring in daily since ‘Adam’—we have to admit the occult teachings” (vol. i. p. 106).

The idea, then is, at the commencement of our planetary chain, that there are concerned with it Builders and Planetary Spirits (vol. 1, p. 128) who have existed as men in previous Manvantaras, and who were the elect of that past Humanity; and a host of other entities, who have progressed to a certain point and whose further evolution is to be carried on upon our planetary chain. Man, as we know him, has to be evolved with whatever else may lie before him during the present planetary cycle, and in that evolution these entities are to take part. Now septenary man consists of 10 138 LUCIFER.

Atma-Buddhi, Manas, and the lower quaternary, and the evolution we have to follow is the wedding of the Monad to the intellectual and vital! entities, the making of the complete Man. For Man “is the product of Nature's gradual perfecting work, like any other living unit on this earth. But this is only with regard to the human tabernacle. That which lives and thinks in man and survives that frame, the masterpiece of evolution—is the ‘Eternal Pilgrim’, the Protean differentiation in space and time of the One Absolute ‘ Unknowable’”’ (vol. ii, p. 728).

Here let us pause for a moment on this term, Monad. The Monad is Atma-Buddhi. Fohat, we read, “traces spiral lines to unite the sixth to the seventh” (Stanza v). ‘‘ The sixth principle in man (Buddhi, the Divine Soul), though a mere breath, in our conceptions, is still something material when compared with divine ‘Spirit' (Atma) of which it is the carrier or vehicle. Fohat, in his capacity of Divine Love (Eros), the elective Power of affinity and sympathy, is shown allegorically as trying to bring the pure Spirit, the Ray inseparable from the one Absolute, into union with the Soul, the two constituting in man the Monap, and in Nature the first link between the ever unconditioned and the manifested ” (Vol. i. p. 119). Now it is essential not to lose sight of the fact that Atma-Buddhi is One through- out the Universe. It is the life, the soul of the Kosmos, and ours only in that we are parts of the All. A ray, indeed, falls into each, but it isthe one ‘light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world”, and every atom in this world and in all others. In a sense, it becomes individualised, as a drop from the ocean, by its union with the individual, but in its essence it remains part of the whole. ‘‘ The Monads are not discrete principles, limited or conditioned, but rays from that one universal absolute Principle” (Vol. ii. p. 167).

It is this Monad which circles round the planetary chain, and whose journey from globe A to globe G makes a Round (Vol. i. pp. 167, 168). Seven times is that journey trodden during the planetary Manvantara. “ The Monad, born of the nature and of the very Essence of the ‘ seven’ (its highest principle becoming immediately enshrined in the seventh Kosmic Element), has to perform its septenary gyration throughout the Cycle of Being and Forms, from the highest to the lowest ; and then again from man to God” (Vol. i. p. 135). There is “a limited number of Monads evolving and growing more and more perfect through their assimilation of many successive personalities, in every new Manvantara..... Although the hosts of more or less progressed Monads are almost incalculable, they are still finite, as is everything else in this Universe of differentiation and finite- ness” (Vol. i. p. 171). It is this Monad which impels to development and progress: ‘‘ That which propels onward and forces evolution, #.¢., compels the growth and development of Man towards perfection, is (¢) the Monap, or that which acts in it unconsciously through a force inherent in itself; and (b) the lower astral body on the personal self. The former, whether imprisoned in a vegetable or an animal body, is endowed with, is indeed THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 139

itself, that force. Owing to its identity with the Art-Force, which, as said, is inherent in the Monad, it is all-potent on the Arupa, or formless plane ” (Vol. ii. pp. 109, 110).

The Monads, in the course of their long pilgrimage, pass through many planetary chains; but as we are here concerned with that chain only of which our earth is part, it must suffice to say briefly as to the Monads which are to incarnate during our planetary Manvantara, that the Secret Doctrine teaches that they arrive on our chain from the chain in which the moon is globe D. (It must be kept in mind that bodies normally visible to us must needs consist of matter able to impress itself upon our retina, /.., matter belonging to our plane.) ‘ Now, it must be remembered that the Monads cycling round any septenary chain are divided into seven classes or hierarchies according to their respective stages of evolution, consciousness, and merit” (vol. i. p. 171); and these classes reach globe A for their new planetary pilgrimage in orderly succession. When the most advanced class of Monads has finished its seventh Round on globe G of the lunar chain, their activity is suspended for a period of pralayic rest; during their last Round, when the hindermost class has worked through a globe, that globe ’ begins its planetary pralaya, and its life-energies pass “to a new Laya centre, which commences the formation of" the corresponding globe on the earth chain (p. 172). The seven classes of Lunar Monads (Lunar Pitris, in the Hindu phrase) will, then, reach our globe A, one after the other; “having ended their life-cycle on the lunar chain, which is inferior to the terrestrial chain " (p. 179), they come to be incarnated on the latter. On globe A, as on the succeeding globes, the cycle of evolution is sevenfold : three elemental kingdoms, followed by the mineral, the vegetable, the animal, the human. Let us figure in our minds the arrival of Class I. at the threshold of the lowest of the three elemental kingdoms; working its way through it, it reaches the second elemental kingdom, and as it begins to evolve through the second, Class I].enters the lowest elemental. As Class I. starts through the highest elemental, Class II. begins the mid- elemental, and Class III. enters the lowest. And so continues the evolution step by step, until Class I. has reached the first stage of the germinal condition of potential humanity on globe A, and Class VII. has entered the lowest elemental kingdom on the same globe. Thus globe A finally manifests the seven kingdoms, each occupied by a class of Lunar Monads or Lunar Pitris :

Lunar Monads, Class I. have reached the Potential Human Stage.

” » II. ” ” Animal _,,

” » III. ” ” Vegetable ,,

” » IV. ” ” Mineral _,,

" » Vz ” " Higher Elemental Stage ” » VI. ” ” Middle ”

” » VII. ” » Lower ”

But the student must remember, in using these familiar names of human, 10a 140 LUCIFER,

animal, etc., that all on globe A is of the most ethereal substance, the mere filmy shadows of organisms; slowly, Round after Round, the seventh group of the celestial hierarchy—the Nature forces or spirits of each globe—build into the filmy shadows the grosser matter, condensing, solidifying, stage by stage (see, with reference to globe D, and therefore, by analogy, for each globe, vol. ii. p. rro: “the spirits of the Earth clothed the shadows and expanded them . .. . it is they who give, or build, the physical tabernacle of man”). It must also be remembered that the ‘“ Man” of Globe A is irrational, senseless; the Monad cannot impress his substance, filmy as it may be: a long journey lies before the Pilgrim, ere he can become con- scious on the material plane; be the matter ever so ethereal, it is not of the Arupa* world. Two STUDENTS OF THE E.S.

Note. It is certain that even on an elementary paper such as this some questions will arise in the minds of many who may read it. Some of those questions students will be able to solve by their own efforts; for it must be remembered that in Esotericism, even more than in any other study, no man can do his brother's thinking for him. Other questions may, however, refuse to be solved even after careful thinking; if such questions are sent to us, to the care of the Editors of Lucifer, 17 Lansdowne Road, Holland Park, W., we will do our best to answer them, or obtain answers for them, and such questions and answers on the preceding paper will be annexed to the following one.

ee el

EASTER MORNING.

From the star-circled dome of Heaven their flight, Worldward, a host of angels speed. Their wings Shed gold light of the Throne that radiance flings Throughout the sunrise. And that mountain’s height Which shadowed, in deep hush, the Christ's death night Is lit with glory; while a seraph sings The song of silence to the King of Kings Whose deathless death is triumph of Love's might.

Each love within us is a Christ new-born And each, in time, our brothers crucify With weary crosses—weary crowns of thorn— With stripes and wounds—until they purify The mighty Self within, and justify The glorious radiance of our resurrection morn. Mary Frances WIGHT.

 

* The student should remember that ¢ is a privative, and signifies without: a rupa, without form, and so with other similar words. 210 LUCIFER,

Theosophical Gleanings,

NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”. Ilf.