

A similar treatment of Rounds 2 and 3 will show the position of each Class throughout and at the end of the sevenfold period of activity; and we may regard the classes at the point they have reached on Globe G as the seed which is to spring up on Globe A of the succeeding Round. Thus Class II, commencing the Potential Human Stage at the beginning of Round II, completes it at the close; and so, in their relative measures, with each Class. If the student works out these successive stages he will find that on Globe D in the fourth Round, Class V is “ inzoonised ” (animal), Class VI is “ inherbised” (vegetable), Class VII is ‘‘inmetal- lised'" (mineral). The stages of the evolution of Man in the Rounds that are of the past are marked for us by a Teacher:

“Man in the First Round and First Race on Globe D, our Earth, was 214 LUCIFER.

an ethereal being (a lunar Dhyani as man), non-intelligent but super- spiritual ; and correspondingly, on the law of analogy, in the First Race of the Fourth Round. In each of the subsequent races and sub-races... . he grows more and more into an encased or incarnate being, but still pre- ponderatingly ethereal... .

“II Round. He(Man)is still gigantic and ethereal but growing firmer and more condensed in body, a more physical man. Yet still less intelligent than spiritual, for mind is a slower and more difficult evolution than is the physical frame... .

“TIE Round. He has now a perfectly concrete or compacted body, at first the form of a giant-ape, and now more intelligent, or rather cunning, than spiritual. For, on the downward arc, he has now reached a point where his primordial spirituality is eclipsed and overshadowed by nascent mentality. In the last half of the Third Round his gigantic stature decreases, and his body improves in texture, and he becomes a more rational being, though still more an ape than a Deva.... (all this is almost exactly repeated in the third Root-Race of the Fourth Round).

“TV Round. Intellect has an enormous development in this Round. The (hitherto) dumb races acquire our (present) human speech on this globe, on which from the Fourth Race, language is perfected and know- ledge increases. At this half-way point of the Fourth Round (as of the Fourth Root, or Atlantean, Race) humanity passes the axial point of the minor Manvantara cycle. . . . the world teeming with the results of intel- lectual activity and spiritual decrease” (vol. i, pp. 188, 189).

The product of each Round, as a Round, is the perfect evolution of one of the principles of Septenary Man, so that when the Manvantara is over Septenary Man will stand perfect and complete. We are in the Fourth Round, the Round during which the lowest point is touched, and to which appropriately belongs the evolution of the Kamic principle. The next Round, the Fifth, will see the development of Manas, the Sixth the manifestation of Buddhi, the Seventh that of Atma.

Let the student also note that as with the Rounds so with the Races on

“a single globe, each Race develops specially one principle, so that as the close of the smaller cycle of the globe in a single Round, the globe humanity shall touch its relative completion in the Seventh Race, its smaller cycle thus repeating the cycle of wider sweep of the Round. The Fourth Race, the Atlantean, developed the Kamic principle with its accompanying grossness of matter, the separation of the sexes having taken place in the Third Race; we are of the Fifth Race, and are developing the Manasic principle, as witness the widespread intellectuality, the immense strides of mentality. The Sixth Race will unveil the lamp of Buddhi, and from the Seventh the flame of Atma will shine brightly forth.

The cycle is repeated on a yet smaller scale in the individual man, the microcosm : his physical body is builded up, sex is perfected, his passions develop and hold sway, and then his intellect attains supremacy. In intra- THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 215

uterine life, yet once again, we trace growth along the same lines: at the commencement of the third month it becomes possible to distinguish sex (Gray) ; the convolutions of the brain, which are connected with intellect, begin to appear about the beginning of the fifth month (Longet, quoted by Dalton) ; development is sufficiently complete for independent external life by the seventh. And then? Well does the “Secret Doctrine” say: “On strict analogy, the cycle of Seven Rounds in their work of the gradual formation of man throughout every kingdom of nature, are repeated on a microscopical scale in the first seven months of gestation of a future human being. Let the student think over and work out this analogy. As the seven months old unborn baby, though quite ready, yet needs two months more in which to acquire strength and consolidate; so man, having perfected his evolution during seven Rounds, remains two periods more in the womb of Mother-Nature before he is born, or rather re-born a Dhyani, still more perfect than he was before he launched forth as a Monad on the newly-built chain of worlds” (vol. ii, 257).

We shall best progress now by concentrating our attention on one of the smaller cycles of evolution, that of our own earth, Globe D, during its period of activity in the Fourth Round. By studying the development of the first five of the Seven Races, light will also be thrown backward on the Kosmic evolution we have been considering, and we shall find the Macrocosm become more intelligible as we grow more familiar with the Microcosm. Two StupDENTs oF THE E. S,

Note. These papers commenced in the March number. If any reader finds any point obscure, he or she is invited to send to the writers the question to which answer is desired. If such questions are sent to us, to the care of the Editor of Lucifer, 17 Lansdowne Road, Holland Park, W., we will do our best to answer them or to obtain answers to them.

RSET

BE STRONG.

“ What good our growing if we bear but leaves; Our hopes and longings are they all in vain ; Will He who in the end counts in the grain Make aught of our unkempt and tear-stained sheaves?”

Not this—but that the sense of duty shows The way of growing in the midst of pain,

How tender shoots may yield the golden grain As later joys which spring from earlier woes.

Then live and work in Hope, nor pause to sigh In useless longing for untimely rest ;

Make good thy day, forego the selfish quest, And night in peace will on thine eyelids lie.

Life’s not the slave of Time; do thou unbind

Her flowerets sweet and strew them in the way ; Then take thy burden in the heat of day,

And live, while live you may, for ALL MANKIND! THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 305

up and very unfriendly criticisms of what he pleases to call ‘‘ The weak points in Theosophy”, in the Agnostic Fournal, Our critic is hard to please, however ; and instead of recognising our courtesy, Mr. Tindall has taken us to task for mutilating his last article. This mutilation, let us say at once, consisted in cutting out two-thirds of his paper, which were only personal attacks against the Medium and Daybreak, its editor, and other Spiritualists. Mr. Tindall should surely understand that we cannot permit Lucifer to be used as & medium for such personalities. He complains that by so doing we have “greatly weakened . . . . the powerful criticism I (he) had intended”. But even the little we have left seems to have called forth a counter-criticism of his “ Follies and Fallacies” in Light, which has some very pointed things to say about their author. The editor of Light calls this paper ‘curiously inaccurate", and we say that if it is half as inaccurate as are his “ Weak Points in Theosophy ”, written probably as an offset to our ‘‘annihilation” of his article—then it would be inaccurate, indeed. Thus, we are told by the editor of Ligé that it is “ almost unkind to quote” from his article. That

We might pursue the criticism, but it is not worth while. ‘ Minds formed of baser clay’, and the general tone of comment on a subject with which the writer is obviously imperfectly acquainted, are tempting- But no good end is gained by attempting to controvert statements such as those made by Mr. Tyndall. They are doubtless made in all sincerity, but without knowledge of facts. And we do not war with such criticism. We only protest against it, lest it should be regarded as true.

This is precisely what we, Theosophists, say of Mr. Tindall’s denuncia- tion of the “‘ Weak points in Theosophy ”, in which there is no “ knowledge of facts” whatever. But we shudder to think what would have been our mutual critic’s fate, had we not mutilated his ‘* powerful criticism ” on Spiritualism! As it is, we are afraid our friend has placed himself between two stools, and has now to make the best he can of his uncomfortable position.

 
