
3. Ought any difference to be made between the Divine Ego and the Monad? May we not say that the Divine Ego is the resultant of the friction of our lives and of our experiences, and that this Ego is the real individual, since the Monad is given us from the universal reservoir and is therefore impersonal?

4. The Ego is the Manas, and as our lives give it experience it is partly their resultant; but note that it is an independent entity, existing before incarnation. Do not confuse the Ego with the “ Higher Self", which is Buddhi. The Ego és the individual, and you rightly say that the Monad is

impersonal, anise Motes on Theosophy and Gaduration.

(The opening speech of a discussion at the Blavatsky Lodge, on Fuly 17th.)

HEOSOPHY claims to be the Science of Life, and must therefore have a direct bearing upon all those great problems which are agitating men’s minds in these closing years of the roth century.

Among such problems, one of the most important, in its bearing upon the whole future of our race, as well as upon the next generation—to which will fall the task of carrying on the Theosophical movement till the last quarter of the coming century—is certainly that of Education. Hence it may not be amiss to call the attention of the readers of Lucifer, especially of those belonging to the Theosophical Society, to the bearing of Theo- sophical teaching upon this question. One fact alone need be pointed to in order to show how intimate and vital is the connexion between Theosophy as embodied in the present Theosophical movement and the whole subject of Education. In every phase of human history, it is the ideal current among the people of any race as to the purpose and meaning of human life on earth, which is the most potent factor in determining the character and guiding spirit of the education given to the young generations of that nation. The education received by the young exercises an influence in moulding their conceptions of life and duty, and thus reacts upon the ideals of their mature years, and so upon future generations.

A passing glance along the galleries of human history may serve to illustrate this statement.

The earliest educational system of which we have any record is that of ancient India, embodied in the caste system. Under this régime the nation was divided into four main classes engaged, respectively: the Brahmans, in spiritual, religious, and scientific studies and pursuits; the Kshatriya, or warrior caste, in the pursuit of arms, politics, administration, in short the conduct and management of the outer national life generally ; the Vaisya, or merchant caste, in commercial pursuits ; while the Sudra, or “out caste” class, embraced all not included in one or other of these three.

This system, in one aspect, was an educational one, based upon a knowledge of the laws of Karma and Reincarnation. In accordance with these, it provided for the reincarnating Ego a determinate sphere of duties in accord with the Karmic affinities it had engendered in past incarnations, In each caste, the children were educated in accordance with the duties they would have to perform in adult life; the ideal expressing itself through the entire system being that each human being has his own specific sphere of duty to fill, a duty as necessary for the welfare of the nation as that of

Qe THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 69

worthless, of the identity of the Basques with the Mongolians. But what does my friend mean by ‘“ Mongolian”? Has he any knowledge of the languages of the interior of China, such as the Lo Lo? One thing we may be thankful for; he is free from the absurdity of calling them “ Turanian ”, as unmeaning a term as Aryan, Hamitic, or Semitic. I wish my stay in the Canary Isles had enabled me to attain more information about the Guanches. But the fact is that, thanks to missionary enterprise and liquor, this old race of Atlanteans is extinct. R. S. Cuarnocx, Ph. Dr., F.S.A. Late President of the London Anthropological Society.

THE “SPOOK". In Dr. Leech’s Obliviad : a Satire, 8vo., New York, 1879, the following quatrain is “‘ attributed to Ovid ” :—

‘Bis duo sunt homini; manes, caro, spiritus, umbra Quatuor ista loci bis duo suscipiunt erra tegit carnem, tumulum circumvolat umbra, Orcus habet manes, Spiritus astra petit”.

Of course these lines form no real quotation from Ovid. At least I am unable to find them in any edition known to me. But whoever wrote them, did not he who thought them have ideas analogous to those of Theosophists on the Septenary Division of Man? If we substitute Prana (or Sthula Sariva) for carnis, Linga Sariva for umbra, Kama Rupa for manes, and Manas, or perhaps Buddhi for spiritus, we have sense given us. But the whole matter requires the guiding assistance of an occultist, who may be able to tell what this quaint old poet (whoever he was, and at whatever time he flourished) really meant.

C. Carter Braxz, F.T.S.

ee eee es — Theosophical Gleanings,

NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”, VII.

T is hard to realize in thought the vast periods comprised in the rise, maturity, and decay of each of the Root-Races of our globe; hard to realize the slowness with which each Race quitted the stage it had occupied so long. Even to-day, as we have seen, there linger on the earth a few far- off direct descendants of the Third Root-Race; even to-day there are among us some few of the Atlantean stock that have not been fused into the Fifth Race. The “ destruction of Atlantis”—as it is termed—due to ** successive disturbances in the axial rotation" of the earth, lasted 200,000 years; the final remnant, Plato's famous island, disappearing within modern times. ‘We have seen the Lemuro-Atlantean Race differentiating on the Atlantic prolongation of Lemuria, and slowly, very slowly, emerged the vast continent, the Fourth, “ bridging the ocean between America and Europe” 79 LUCIFER.

(vol. i, p. 790). A mass of scientific evidence proving the existence of this Continent is given in the “Secret Doctrine", vol. ii, pp. 790, e¢ seg. So many lines of evidence converge that it is easy to see that science will soon be quite indignant with the ignorance of any who deny that this continent once stretched where now the waves of the Atlantic roll. To us, who are Theosophists, the special interest of Atlantean man lies in the fact that he stands as the apotheosis of matter, the most material of human incarnations: that it was in those days that “ the heaviest Karma of our Fifth Race was generated”: that the third eye ceased to function as physical and psychic passions overpowered the spiritual: that Humanity, reaching its full physical development in these, at the middle-point of the Atlantean period “ the door was shut”, and no fresh Monads, thenceforward, incarnated on our globe (see vol. ii, pp. 302, 303). The Atlanteans, “the first progeny of semi-divine man after his separation into sexes” (vol. ii, p. 273), were in all external characteristics men as we know them now, save that they were gigantic in comparison with their Fifth Race descendants, passing along the same road as has been travelled by all plants and animals, the huge primeval organisms being now represented by comparatively diminutive types. Born of the less spiritual of the Third Race, the Fourth started on its career under unfavorable conditions. ‘“ Endowed with divine powers, and feeling in himself his Inner God, each [man of the Third Race] felt he was a Man-God in his nature, though an animal in his physical self. The struggle between the two began from the very day they tasted of the fruit of the Tree of Wisdom; a struggle for life between the spiritual and the psychic, the psychic and the physical. Those who conquered the lower principles by obtaining mastery over the body, joined the ‘Sons of Light’. Those who fell victims to their lower natures became the slaves of Matter. From ‘Sons of Light and Wisdom’ they ended by becoming the ‘Sons of Darkness’. They had fallen in the battle of mortal life with Life immortal, and all those so fallen became the seed of the future generations of Atlanteans” (vol. ii, p. 272). But these Atlanteans themselves degenerated as the centuries rolled on. From their earliest tribes, we are told, they separated “into the righteous and the unrighteous; into those who worshipped the one unseen Spirit of Nature, the ray of which man feels within himself—or the Pantheists; and those who offered fanatical worship to the Spirits of the Earth, the dark, Kosmic, anthropomorphic Powers, with whom they made alliance. These were the earliest Gibborim, ‘the mighty men of renown in those days’ (Gen. vi); who become with the Fifth Race the Kabirim, Kabiri with the Egyptians and the Phoenicians, Titans with the Greeks, and Rakshasas and Daityas with the Indian races” (vol. ii, Pp: 273, 274). Hence the title acquired by the later Atlanteans, belonging to this “unrighteous race", of “the wicked”; in the Commentaries Atlantis is spoken of as “the abode of the wicked" (vol. ii, p. gor), and the Atlanteans ‘of the shadow” become the typical Black Magicians, the sorcerers, who were finally destroyed with the land they cursed. THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 7

The Atlantean is the type of intellect without spirituality, of terrestrial wisdom, of the triumph of Kama-Manas. He is the analogue of the Humanity of the Fourth Round, as described by a master: “ Intellect has an enormous development in this Round. The (hitherto) dumb races acquire our (present) human speech on this globe, on which, from the Fourth Race language is perfected and knowledge increases. At this half- way point of the Fourth Round (as of the Fourth Root, or Atlantean race) humanity passes the axial point of the minor Manvantaric cycle .... the world teeming with the results of intellectual activity and spiritua! decrease” (vol. i, p. 189). The language of the Atlanteans became agglutinative, and then, in the most highly developed, passed on to its next stage: “While the ‘cream’ of the Fourth Race gravitated more and more towards the apex of physical and intellectual evolution, thus leaving as an heir-loom to the nascent Fifth (the Aryan) Race the inflexional, highly developed languages, the agglutinative decayed and remained as a fragmentary fossil idiom, scattered now, and nearly limited to the aboriginal tribes of America” (vol. ii, p. 199). In color, the yellow of the Third Race darkened into ‘‘red-yellow (the red Indians and the Mongolians being the descen- dants of these), and finally into brown-white Races—which now, together with the yellow Races, form the great bulk of Humanity ” (vol. ii, 250).

We catch our clearest glimpse of the vast intellectual advances made by the Atlanteans in the astronomical knowledge handed down by them to their Aryan descendants. Asuramaya, the Atlantean, ‘‘as great a magician as he was an Astrologer and an Astronomer” (vol. ii, p. 50) stands, to the Occultist, at the very fountain head of astronomical knowledge. To him are ascribed various astronomical works, based on the records of the mysterious Narada, Narada whose name appears in close connexion with the Fourth Race, as with each other, but as to whom little information is given. He is spoken of in the Puranas, but the blinds are so complete that the reader is more likely to be led astray than to acquire trustworthy knowledge; thus, to take but a single instance: Narada visits Patala, the infernal regions; but Patala really means the Antipodes—Central America—as we find by collating the passage: ‘Some of the descendants of the primitive Nagas, the Serpents of wisdom, peopled America, when its continent arose during the palmy days of the great Atlantis (America being the Patala, or Antipodes of Jambu-Dwipa, not of Bharata-Varsha)” (vol. ii, p. 182). And again H. P. B. points out that “ Arjuna, Krishna’s companion and chela, is said to have descended into Patala, the ‘ Antipodes’, and therein married Ulfpi, a Naga (or N4gini rather), the daughter of the king of the Nagas "—adding in a footnote: “Ulfipi has an entirely Atlantean ring about it. Like Atlantis, it is neither a Greek nor a Sanscrit name, but reminds one of Mexican names” (vol. ii, p. 214). This would seem to suggest that it is in Central America that we may hope to find some traces of Atlantean civili- sation; and if it be from the Atlanteans that the Mexicans and Peruvians descended, the problem that has puzzled many a student of their strange 72 LUCIFER.,

unique civilisations would be solved. It seems likely that as Atlantis was first populated as a prolongation of Lemuria, so the Fifth Continent would be first populated as a prolongation of Atlantis; and then, separated from the Eastern hemisphere by the destruction of Atlantis, would be left to develop along the lines traced by the Atlantean progenitors, revealing, when rediscovered by the East, the remains of its archaic civilisation.

To return to Asuramaya, the pupil (?) of Narada, and his astronomical records. The origin of the Zodiac is hidden in these dark regions: the Zodiac, with its original ten signs, becoming twelve by the separation of Virgo-Scorpio into two—symbolising the separation of the sexes—and the addition of the sign later known as Libra (see vol. ii, p. 502, footnote). On this we read in “Isis Unveiled”: ‘The true Sabean astrological doctrine secretly taught that within this double sign was hidden the explanation of the gradual transformation of the world, from its spiritual and subjective into the ‘two-sexed’ sublunary state. . . . To make it clearer, the sign Virgo-Scorpio . . . . became simply Virgo, and the duplication, or Scorpio, was placed between Libra, the seventh sign (which is Enoch, or the angel Metatron, or Mediator between spirit and matter, or God and man). It now became Scorpio (or Cain), which sign or patriarch led mankind to destruction, according to exoteric theology; but according to the true doctrine of the Wisdom- religion, it indicated the degradation of the whole universe in tts course of evolution downward from the subjective to the objective. The sign of Lsbra is credited asa later invention by the Greeks, but it is not generally stated that those among them who were initiated had only made a change of names conveying the same idea as the secret name to those ‘who knew’, leaving the masses as unwise as ever. Yet it was a beautiful idea of theirs, this Libra, or the balance, expressing as much as could possibly be done without unveiling the whole and ultimate truth. They intended it to imply that when the course of evolution had taken the worlds to the lowest point of grossness, where the earths and their products were coarsest, and their inhabitants most brutish, the turning point had been reached—the forces were at an even balance. At the lowest point, the still lingering divine spark of spirit within, began to convey the upward impulse. The scales typified that eternal equilibrium which is the necessity of a universe of harmony, of exact justice, of the balance of centripetal and centrifugal forces, darkness and light, spirit and matter” (‘Isis Unveiled”, vol. ii, pp. 456, 457). Such were the thoughts which brooded in the minds of the designers of the Zodiac, and it was under such influences that Asuramaya the Atlantean, attained his knowledge of astronomy. ‘It is Asuramaya who is said to have based all his astronomical works upon these records [those of Narada], to have determined the duration of all the past geological and cosmical periods, and the length of all the cycles to come, till the end of this life-cycle, or the end of the seventh Race” (vol. ii, p. 49). On his works are founded the calculations of the Brahmin Initiates, the astronomy THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 73

of Hindustan and thence of Egypt. Here is the explanation of that startling knowledge of astronomy among “the ancients” which has caused so much bewilderment among modern students. ‘There were giants in those days”, in more senses than one.

We have already noticed that the heaviest Karma of the Fifth Race was generated among the Atlanteans: until the close of the Third Race there had been no death. The “men of the Third began to die out. Till then there had been no regular death, but only a transformation, for men had no personality as yet. They had Monads—breaths of the One Breath, and as impersonal as the source from which they proceeded. They had bodies, or rather shadows of bodies, which were sinless, hence Karmaless. Therefore, as there was no Kamaloka—least of all Nirvana or even Devachan—for the ‘souls’ of men who had no personal Egos, there could be no intermediate periods between the incarnations. Like the Pheenix, primordial man resurrected out of his old into a new body. Each time and with each new generation, he became more solid, more physically perfect, agreeably with the evolutionary law, which is the Law of Nature. Death came with the complete physical organism, and with it—moral decay” (vol. ii. p. 610). With this complete physical organism and its occupation by its divine tenant came also moral responsibility, and therefore the generation of Karma. For “in the case of the Atlanteans, it was precisely the spiritual being that sinned” (vol. ii. p. 302). Not content with using their intellect for the gaining of new experience, serviceable to their race, they followed “ willingly the left Path”, and went onwards to their destruc- tion. Some—the one third who “ remained faithful "moved from the lands fated to be submerged, and became the progenitors of the Fifth Root Race, some lingering on with the characteristics of their own Race until 11,000 years ago. “The wise races had perceived ‘the black storm dragons, called down by the dragons of wisdom '—and ‘ had fled, led on by the shining Protectors of the most Excellent Land’—the great ancient adepts, presumably; those the Hindus refer to as their. Manus and Rishis’ (vol. ii. p. 425). Taking root again in Central Asia they produced the Turanians, the Mongols, the Chinese, and others. From these relics of the Fourth Race, their progenitors, the budding Aryan nations learned the elements of their civilization, “the hidden virtues of precious and other stones, of chemistry or rather alchemy, of mineralogy, geology, physics and astronomy " (vol. ii. p. 426). The unwise perished with the submerged continent of Atlantis; the last of the giant Atlanteans—on the Ruta and Daitya Island Continents—were overwhelmed some 850,000 years ago, towards the close of the Miocene age: the Aryo-Atlanteans disappeared with the last island of Atlantis—Plato’s Atlantis—some 11,000 years ago only (vol. ii. p. 435). From the Ruta Atlanteans descended the Egyptians, with their marvellous civilisation, their scientific knowledge, their mechanical skill. And thus, while the floods that whelmed Atlantis have left behind them the traditions that tell, both in Western and Eastern lands, 74 LUCIFER.

of a supposed “ universal deluge”, the knowledge that made Atlantis great passed on to its children of the Fifth Race, that Race of which we are part, and before which still stretch many a thousand years.

Two Srupents or Tue E.S.

Answers To Questions left over for want of Space.

PRR aso “ Going To and Fro in the Garth.”

A STRANGE CUSTOM.

ATIONAL folklore, full of mysterious and often incomprehensible customs R and pagan ceremonies, survives in Russia to this day as well as in other Slavonian countries, and even more so than in Ireland. One of the strangest of these customs is to be seen in the town of Alyoshki,in the government of Taurida (Crimea), Dnieprovsky District. Tbe ethnographer, Aivarnitzky, while making his learned investigations on the left shore of the Dniepre, came across “the strangest sight he had ever witnessed". According to the Russian scientist, the weird ceremony of the wedding of the crawfish is still religiously observed by the orthodox Russian inhabitants of Alyoshki and the peasants of the district in general, and seems to have degenerated into a cult. This wedding takes place on the festival day of SS. Peter and Paul (June zgth). A male and female crawfish are caught in the river, after which the former is dressed in male attire, and the latter in a female dress, adorned with flowers and ribbands. The wedding of the two is then performed round a table in the middle of a room by a man chosen to represent a priest, and after the ceremony the newly-married couple are divested of their robes and allowed to return to their native river. Finally the guests headed by the “ priest": drink whiskey, play on various instruments, dance, and make merry till late at night. The custom prevails among fisher- men and the population settled on the river shore; and they explain that it is done to propitiate the water God, and obtain thereby a greater abundance of fish, and, consequently—wealth.

A PHYSIOLOGICAL FREAK OF NATURE.

In the medical annals of Grotz (Austria), may be found the following statement. A certain Countess Koenigsdiser who lived at the beginning of the century, was afflicted with a remarkable idiosyncracy of a most painful kind, which might be doubted were it not for the unimpeachable testimony of all her friends and her next of kin, who would far rather conceal than divulge it. The fact is that this kind and amiable lady, the best of wives, and the mother of several sons and daughters, could not bear the sight of her children. This repulsion manifested itself physiologically not psychically, as some might think. She loved her children, but whenever one was brought to her, she went into a dead swoon and remained in a semi-cataleptic condition for hours. As this happened invariably, whether the children were infants or grown up, there remained but one means of avoiding s0 painful a situation, namely to bring up the children away from their mother.

One of the sons who had never seen his mother grew up and became an officer in the army. After an absence of long years from his native land, he returned 