

gs" have seen the “ Pilgrim” start on his long Manvantaric journey, ‘ with its forty-nine “stations”, at each of which he performs manifold gyrations; for each stage of matter through which he has to pass—elemental, mineral, vegetable, animal—has its sub-stages, and sub-sub-stages, and so on through many sub-divisions, through each of which our Pilgrim must patiently work his way. At the end of the first Round we shall find our seven classes describable under the same headings as were used at the end of the first Globe in Lucifer p. 139, only each class will have then completed a stage, instead of a sub-stage. The intelligent student will have noted that this course of evolution implies that Class I travels with seven-fold rapidity as compared with Class VII; and this is so. Class I has been through the seven stages during the period in which Class VII has only accomplished its passage through the first; Class VII taking as long to pass through a sub-stage as Class I takes to pass through a stage.

When the evolution on Globe A has exhausted its first impulse, and the state described in Lucifer p. 139 has been reached, Globe A passes into Pralaya, and all life-manifestation sleeps.

Pausing here for a moment, let us take a bird’s-eye view of the country over which our Pilgrim has to pass, for an occasional glimpse of the whole makes more intelligible the details of the part. The Monad “shot down by the law of Evolution into the lowest form of matter” (vol. i, p. 246), climbs upward during three-and-a-half Rounds, «¢., till it reaches the midway Globe, Globe D, for the fourth time. During all this time “matter” is solidifying into what we know as matter, but “all this, up to the Third Round, is formless, as matter, and senseless, as conscious- ness" (vol. i, p. 247). Not till the midway point is touched has matter reached material perfection, and physical man reached completion. Mean- while, on higher planes, a correlative evolution is proceeding, preparing the Inner Self as this the Outer. The ‘conscious, rational, individual soul (Manas) ‘ the principle or the intelligence of the Elohim’” (vol. i, p. 247) must become fitted for the dwelling a-preparing for it. And so “the Occult Doctrine teaches that while the Monad is cycling on downward into matter, these very Elohim—or Pitris, the lower Dhyan-Chohans—are evolving pari passy with it on a higher and more spiritual plane, descending THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. aur

also relatively into matter on their own plane of consciousness, when, after having reached a certain point [that is, the midway point, on Globe D, in the fourth Round], they will meet the incarnating senseless Monad, encased in the lowest matter, and blending the two potencies, Spirit and Matter, the union will produce that terrestrial symbol of the ‘ Heavenly Man’ in space—prerFecT MAN” (vol. i, p. 247). These “lower Dhyan- Chohans”, who are the future intellectual principle in man, are variously spoken of as Manasa-Dhyanis, Solar Devas, Agnishwatta Pitris (vol. i, p. 181), the Hierarchy of Flames, the Sons of the Fire, the Kumaras, the ‘ fashioners of the Inner Man” (vol. i, 86, 87). It is some of these who are ‘destined to incarnate as the Egos of the forthcoming crop of mankind. The human Ego is neither Atman nor Buddhi, but the higher Manas: the inteliectual fruition and the efflorescence of the intellectual self-conscious Egotism—in the higher spiritual sense. The ancient works refer to it as Karana Savira on the plane of Sutratma, which is the golden thread on which, like beads, the various personalities of this higher Ego are strung” (vol. ii, p. 79). Thus in Perfect Man we have a “union” of “three streams” (vol. i, p. 181), the Monadic, the Intellectual, the Physical: it is the evolution of the Physical, brooded over by the Monadic, that we study in the first three and a-half Rounds; the Physical, building up by the Nature forces (see Lucifer, p. 140), the Monadic, the Lunar Monads or Pitris.

The most developed of these Monads, our Class I, are they “ whose function it is to pass in the First Round through the whole triple cycle of the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms in their most ethereal, filmy, and rudimentary forms, in order to clothe themselves in, and assimilate, the nature of the newly-formed chain. They are those who first reach the human form (if there can be any form in the realm of the almost subjective) on globe A in the First Round. It is they, therefore, who lead and represent the human element during the Second and Third Rounds, and finally evolve their shadows at the beginning of the Fourth Round for the second class, or those who come behind them” (vol. i, p. 174). ‘The Monads of Class II reach the incipient human stage only in the Second Round ” (vol. i, p. 173), and the Monads of Class III only in the Third Round. Inthe middle of the Fourth Round “the ‘door’ into the human kingdom closes ” (vol. i, p. 173), and those Monads which, at this point, are “still occupying animal! forms” “ will not become men at all during this Manvantara” (vol. i, p. 182)—-with an exception for which we need not here pause. There remains only to note in this general survey of the Pilgrim’s Path, that the matter of which the globes and their inhabitants were composed during the first Three Rounds may fitly be termed “astral”, the word astral implying ‘starry, shining, or pellucid, in various and numerous degrees, from a quite filmy to a viscid state” (vol. ii, p. 251). In each Round matter becomes more substantial than it was in the preceding Round. So also does each globe pass from filmy to viscid during its period

16a 212, LUCIFER.

of activity in each Round, and with each Round, the viscid becomes more and more solid ; until, in the fourth Round, each globe touches its acme of solidity, and Globe D, our earth, being the midmost, reaches the densest solidity at the middle point of its active period in Round IV—the midway point of Manvantaric evolution. ‘Every Round (on the descending scale) is but a repetition in a more concrete form of the Round which preceded it, as every globe—down to our fourth sphere (the actual earth)—is a grosser and more material copy of the more shadowy sphere which precedes it in their successive order, on the three higher planes” (vol. i, p. 232). ‘* Every Round, as well as every subsequent globe, from A: to G, having been, and still having to be, the arena of the same evolution, only repeated each time on a more solid material basis ” (vol. ii, p. 256).

Such is the general outline of the evolution: let us now return to our detail.

We have seen Pralaya follow the period of manifestation on Globe A. When the dawn again begins to break, Globe B becomes the sphere of evolution, and on this globe, in regular succession, Class I to VII renew their pilgrimage. Class I passes swiftly through the six preliminary stages till it reaches the potential human, and wins in this a further step of progress. The other classes evolve, each more slowly than the one above it, in regular order. When the “ life-impulse " is once more exhausted and the dusk of pralaya is descending on Globe B, we may describe the condition as :—

Class I have reached the Potential Human, Stage 2.

” II ” ” ” Animal ”

» Il ” ” » Wegetable ,,

” IV ” ” ” Mineral ”

” v ” ” ” Higher Elem., Stage 2. » VI » » » Middle, Stage 2.

sy vil ” ” ” Lower ”

Once more after Pralaya comes Manvantaric dawn, and Globe C becomes the station of the Pilgrim. Here Class I passes swiftly from elemental up to potential human, and adds the third stage to those already acquired. And so on, through Globes D, E, F, G, until when Pralaya comes to Globe G, Class I has reached what we may call Germ-Humanity, with a Rupa, however filmy and unsubstantial, the development of this First “Principle” or “Sheath” of Septenary man being the outcome of the First Round. And now, for Class I the experience of the sub-human groups is complete. In no subsequent Round do these Monads traverse the sub-human kingdoms: they have finished with the elemental, the mineral, the vegetable, the animal kingdoms, and henceforth their pil- grimage is only in the human.

It is very difficult to represent the progress made during the First Round, without falling into gross inacurracy, and yet one would fain convey THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 213

some definite idea, not too erroneous, of the evolutional stages. It is clear, from all we know of nature, that there are no sharp dividing classes between her kingdoms, and that one passes into another by insensible gradations. Bearing this in mind, in order to correct the sharp contrasts that seem to be implied in the use of numerals, if we take an evolving life as passing say from mineral to vegetable, we may figure it to ourselves as the increasing of the vegetable element and the decreasing of the mineral; and if we divide it into seven parts, the pure mineral would be mineral 7, and the pure vegetable would be vegetable 7, while transitional stages might be

mineral 6 mineral 5 vegetable 1’ vegetable 2’ replacing the retrograding mineral. Taking this nomenclature, clumsy as it is, as at least suggesting if not expressing a truth, we may then draw up the following table, as descriptive of the state of each globe in turn before Pralaya during Round I, and of the Monadic and Physical progress. The horizontal lines give the evolution: read vertically the condition of the globe is suggested.

be figured as and so on, the evoluting vegetable

 

 

 

 

 

ROUND I.

Pr _ Z & GLose A. Grose B.| GLoze C.| Gone D.' Grose E. | Grose F. | Goze G.

oy x | Manr --|Mman 2{man 3/man 4/man 5j;man 6)man 7 2 | Animal animal 6 | animal 5 | animal 4 | animal 3 | animal 2 ) animal 1 \ *‘|man ij|man 2{man 3/man 4|man §|man 6 vegetable 6.vegetable 5 vegetable 4 vegetable 3;vegetable 2: vegetable 1 3, Vegetable .. animal 1 | animal 2 | animal 3 animal 4 | animal 5 | animal 6 ! Mineral mineral 6 | mineral 5 | mineral 4 ' mineral 3 | mineral 2 ' mineral 1 4 **|vegetable rivegetable 2'vegetable 3 vegetable 4\vegetable 5 vegetable 6

!

: H. E. 6) 4H. E.5;H.E. 4'H.E. 3|/H.E. 2) HE. 1 5 Higher Elemental mineral 1 | mineral 2 | mineral 3. mineral 4 | mineral 5 | mineral 6 . M.E. 6/M.E. 5|M.E. 4 M.E.3/M.E.2|/M.E.1 6 | Middle Elemental! yy Fy | HE. 2| HE. 3| H.E. 4|H.E. 5| HE. 6 LE 6/LE. 5|LE qg;/LE. 3/LE. 2!:LE 1: 7 Lower Elemental) yy Er |M. E. 2, M.E. 3|M.E.4|M.E. 5|M. E. 6

 