THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 51

Theosophical Gleanings,

OR

NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”.

E are literally what our signature says: Two Students, nothing more pretentious. If we are also what has been called “ com- municative learners,” it is because we feel that what have been difficulties to us are probably difficulties to others, and that fellow-students can some- times lend each other a helping hand over a rough piece of road. In reading the “Secret Doctrine” the student is apt to be confused, even dazed, by the range of erudition, the wealth of illustration, the abundance of digressions, the number of literary allusions. Devas and Daimons, Dhyani Buddhas and Kumaras, Yugas and cycles, satyrs and fakirs, alchemists and adepts, Manus and Monads, whirl round him in dazzling phantasmagoria, and he rises from hours of effort, his only distinct acquire- ment a headache. We have found the most fruitful system of study is to fix on some one thing, to follow it through all its windings with dogged persistency, steadily hunting it down through the two volumes, disregarding all alluring by-ways and seductive glades, until there lies before us that one thing in its completeness, with every touch given to it from beginning to end, clear, definite, comprehensible. It may be remembered that there was one Proteus who could give the most interesting information if only you could keep your grip on him through all his transformations, until he re-assumed his proper shape and became conversable. So in following the Protean shapes in the ‘Secret Doctrine,” if you can only “ hang on” to the end your reward is sure.

Our first notes will be on the Seven Rounds, our object to trace the Monad in his long pilgrimage from his landing on the First Globe in our Chain for the First Round, till we lose him in the dazzling radiance of his final triumph. A brief introduction, giving the broad outlines of the funda- mental principles of Cosmic Evolution, may fitly precede this detailed study, for a grasp of these principles is essential to the full understanding of their working in our Manvantara.

Tue Cycve oF Activity. [All references in which only volume and page are given are to the '' Secret Doctrine '".]

Everywhere in Nature we see rhythmic alternation, waking and sleeping, day and night, activity and rest, life and death. ‘As above, so below ”; in the Macrocosm as in the Microcosm. So, to the eye of the Esotericist, 52 LUCIFER.

Existence has its day of waking activity, its night of sleeping rest, the Universal Life flows out into the universe of form, ebbs back into formless No-Thing, ‘‘ Days and Nights of Brahm4” in the allegorical phrase of the Hindu, the outbreathing and the inbreathing of the illimitable One who is All. “It is the One Lirg, eternal, invisible, yet omnipresent, without beginning or end, yet periodical in its regular manifestations, between which periods reigns the dark mystery of non-Being; unconscious, yet absolute consciousness ; unrealisable, yet the one self-existent reality; truly, ‘a chaos to the sense, a Kosmos to the reason”. Its one absolute attribute, which is 1rseLF—eternal, ceaseless motion—is called in esoteric parlance the “Great Breath,” which is the perpetual motion of the universe, in the sense of limitless, ever-present Space” (vol. i. p. 2). That Ir must be, we know; else nothing had been nor could be: but before its mystery human thought is helpless, futile—* silence is more reverent than speech”.

A period of activity is a Manvantara; a period of rest a Pralaya; and these succeed each other in endless succession. The ‘dawn of differentia- tion” (vol. i. p. 1) is the dawn of the Manvantaric day; thenceforward a ceaseless evolution, till the cycle is complete and rest comes with pralayic night. And here at once arises the student's first stumbling-block. In the Secret Teaching all things are regarded as of sevenfold aspect, and the same word is often used for each of the subsidiary seven as for the complete thing they make up. The word Manvantara, or Manu-Antara, means literally “‘ between two Manus,” and, as we shall see later, there are Root Manus for Rounds and subsidiary Manus for globes. Hence we have the Minor Manvantara for the life of a single globe, the Major Manvantara for a Round of the seven globes, the Maha- (great) Manvantara for the life of the Kosmos, all which, with other periods, will become plain enough as we proceed : it suffices for the moment to grasp clearly the idea that Man- vantara stands for a period of activity, and it is better, at the outset, not to connect with it any definite number of years.

So, again, with the words Manu, Dhyani Buddha, Dhyani Chohan, and others that meet us at every turn in the ‘Secret Doctrine”. They are generic, not individual, names; thus Manu, the thinker, ‘is but the per- sonified idea of the ‘ Thought Divine’ ” (vol. i. p. 63), and the word is used for those who stand at the beginning of a new cycle of evolution, whether it be great or small. The student is apt to be bewildered when he has met “Manu” as the head of the seven races, and then comes across “‘ Manu” again in a comparatively subordinate position as the head of a single race ; or when, having realised that a ‘“‘ Manvantara” is between two Manus, he learns suddenly that there were fourteen Manus in the Manvantara he is studying. But the seven pairs mark the smaller Manvantaras within the larger. The word Dhyani is synonymous with Deva, a lofty spiritual entity, while Buddha is the Wise One: ‘“ Lords of Wisdom” gives some- | thing of the idea of Dhyani Buddha, and of such entities are many classes THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 53

or grades. So with Dhyani Chohan, the Lord Deva. While ourselves using the esoteric names in preference, we shall try, at starting, to give the equivalents, as some of the puzzlements of the student arise from his not realising the variety of names, sometimes Greek, sometimes Hindu, some- times Thibetan, used indifferently to express the same thought. Esoteric philosophy is not identical with exoteric Buddhism or exoteric Brahminism, and our readers will often meet with statements that conflict with, say, the statements of Mr. Rhys Davids. That learned Orientalist deals with the public teachings of one religion, we with the Secret Doctrine that lies at the root of all; and this must be borne in mind when differences—especially differences in numbers—are noted.

As regards the truth or the falsity of the outlines of cosmical evolution in the “ Secret Doctrine,” for the average man at the present time no proof is possible, any more than you could prove to him straight off the abstruse mathematical theories that require the existence of fourth dimensional space. “It is thus that things have evolved,” says the Teacher, ‘‘ and you can find it out for yourself if you will, as you can, raise yourself to our vantage- ground of vision. As you are, you cannot get it first-hand: the simpler parts of our teachings you can test and prove; but this, for the present, is beyond you. Take it as a theory, a hypothesis, or, if you choose, leave it alone, and confine yourself to the terrestrial part of our doctrines.” With this preface, we proceed to

Tue Dawn oF THE Mana-MANVANTARA.

“ The One life, eternal, invisible,” is to manifest in Space and Time. It is the ABsoLuTE, spoken of as Sat by the Hindus, as Parasranm by the Vedantins, as ApI-Buppua by the Buddhists, as A1in-Sorn by the Kabba- lists, as Absolute Being and non-Being by Hegel and his school. This is that ‘‘ Omnipresent, Eternal, Boundless and immutable PrincipLe on which all speculation is impossible, since it transcends the power of human con- ception and could only be dwarfed by any human expression or similitude. It is beyond the range and reach of thought—in the words of Mandukya, ‘unthinkable and unspeakable’ .... That Essence which is out of all relation to conditioned existence, and of which conscious existence is a con- ditioned symbol” (vol. i. pp. 14, 15). The Causeless Cause, the Rootless Root, Occultism has called It, striving to image the unimaginable. It “is symbolised in the Secret Doctrine under two aspects. On the one hand, absolute abstract Space, representing bare subjectivity, the one thing which no human mind can either exclude from any conception or conceive of by itself. On the other, absolute abstract Motion representing Unconditioned Consciousness.

Even our Western Thinkers have shewn that Consciousness is incon- ceivable to us apart from change, and motion best symbolises change, its essential characteristic. The latter aspect of the One Reality is also 54 LUCIFER.

symbolised by the term ‘The Great Breath’, a symbol sufficiently graphic to need no further elucidation ” (vol. i. p. 14). This is the first fundamental axiom of the Secret Doctrine, which is thus essentially Pantheist in its philosophy.

Having posited the Absolute Life, out of relation, to us unthinkable, we turn to the consideration of the Universal Life as periodical, at the beginning of the Manvantaric period. The Hindus, figuring Parabrahm as a blank circle, have placed a point in the midst of such a circle to symbolise Mulaprakriti, the Root of Substance, called by Subba Row “a sort of veil thrown over ” the “ unconditioned and absolute Reality”. By the Vedan- tins the term is applied to an aspect of Parabrahm: “ from its (the Logos’) objective standpoint, Parabrahm appears to it as Mulaprakriti” (vol. i. Pp. 10, note).

At this re-awakening of the periodical life, the first differentiation is the First, or Unmanifested, Logos—to use the accepted Greek term—Dor- jechang in the Thibetan. This primary emanation is the Supreme Buddha of the Buddhists, the First Cause, the Unconscious of Hartmann—‘ a bright ray from” the ‘darkness ” of the One unknown.

‘** As the Lord of all mysteries he cannot manifest,” and from the First emanates the Second Logos, the manifested, Dorjesempa, poetically called the “‘diamond heart” of the First, sent into the world of manifestation. This is Purusha-Prakriti, Spirit-Matter, the Life, the Spirit of the Universe. (Compare vol. i. p. 16 and p. 571.) This is the Atman of the Vedantins, the Heavenly Man of the Hermetic philosopher, the creative God of all religions—the Demiourgos, the Osiris of the Egyptians, the Ahura-Mazda of the Zoroastrians, the four-faced Brahma of the Hindus (p. 110). It is the substance whereof all things are to be made, and the life that animates them. Hence “the Occultists .... trace every atom in the universe, whether an aggregate or single, to-One Unity, or Universal Life”; they «do not recognise that anything in Nature can be tnorganic”; they “know of no such thing as dead matter . . . . The ‘wave-motion of living particles’ becomes comprehensible on the theory of a Spiritual One life, of a univer- sal Vital principle independent of our matter, and manifesting as atomic energy only on our plane of consciousness ” (vol. ii. p. 672). ‘* The vstal jires are in all things, and not an atom is devoid of them” (vol. ii, p. 267). This Spirit-Matter manifests itself in Kosmos in seven different states: the first and second or sub-physical elemental kingdoms, the third or terrestrial, the fourth or astral, the fifth or that of mind, the sixth or that of spirit, each has its own protyle, whereof are constituted all its phenomena. The seventh state, the highest, is that of the Logos itself (see vol. ii. p. 737). To the Occultist what is called ‘spirit’ and what is called “ matter”, the normally intangible and tangible, are but the two poles of the one universal Spirit- Matter, the Life-Substance, the two-faced Unity. The characteristics of matter in each stage—or on each “ plane ”—can only become known to us as we develop the senses that can apprehend them, when they would be- THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 55

come as easy of investigation as is the third-stage-matter to us at the present time.

The Kosmic cycle will be—figuring Kosmos as a sphere—from the pole of Spirit round to the pole of Matter, on the descending arc, and from the pole of Matter back to that of Spirit’on the ascending. As the Life- Substance is one, the process will be the crystallising and densifying of the ethereal into grossest materiality, and the sublimation and rarefying of that materiality into the ethereal. And so for our immediate Manvantara the progress is figured as through seven globes arranged on four planes: in the three first the “descent into matter’, in the fourth the greatest density and the turning-point, in the three last the re-ascent (see right-hand diagram, vol. i. p. 153). It is Involution and Evolution, the complementary principles of the universe, ‘‘an eternal spiral progress into matter with a proportionate obscuration of spirit—though the two are one—followed by an inverse ascent into spirit and the defeat of matter” (vol. ii. p. 732).

If this central conception be clearly grasped by the student, and applied, amid the differences of detail, to every cycle, large or small, the difficulties in the way will be much lightened. It is the key to the general understanding of the evolution of the Kosmos, of the planetary chain, of the globes, of the races, of the individual. One of these correspondences, the evolution of a globe, has never been put more clearly than by a Master: ‘There are seven kingdoms. The first group comprises three degrees of elementals, or nascent centres of forces—from the first stage of the differentiation of Mulaprakriti to its third degree—t.c. from full uncon- sciousness to semi-perception; the second or higher group embraces the kingdoms from vegetable to man; the mineral kingdom thus forming the central or turning-point in the degrees of the ‘Monadic Essence ‘"—con- sidered as an Evoluting Energy. Three stages in the elemental side; the mineral kingdom; three stages on the objective physical side—these are the seven links of the evolutionary chain. A descent of spirit into matter, equivalent to an ascent in physical evolution; a re-ascent from the deepest depths of materiality (the mineral) towards its status quo ante, with a corres- ponding dissipation of concrete organisms up to Nirvana—the vanishing point of differentiated matter. Perhaps a simple diagram will aid us (see p. 56).

The line AD represents the gradual obscuration of spirit as it passes into concrete matter; the point D indicates the evolutionary position of the mineral kingdom from its incipient D to its ultimate concretion A; C, B, A, on the left-hand side of the figure, are the three stages of elementa, evolution ; #.¢., the three successive stages passed by the spiritual impulse (through the elementals—of which little is permitted to be said) before they are imprisoned in the most concrete form of matter; and A, B, C, on the right-hand side, are the three stages of organic life—vegetable, animal, human. What is total obscuration of spirit is complete perfection of its polar anti- thesis, matter; and this idea is conveyed in the lines AD and DA. The arrows show the line of travel of the evolutionary impulse in entering its 56 LUCIFER.

vortex, and expanding again into the subjectivity of the Apso.uTz. The central thickest line DD, is the Mineral Kingdom” (‘Five years of Theosophy ”, pp. 276-278).

In this description the student will mark the identity of the master-idea and the variation of application to a smaller evolutionary cycle; unity amid diversity is the key-note of the Esoteric teachings, and if the student can keep his ear attuned to the key-note, he will readily follow the intricacies of |the harmony.

 

LOWER HIGHER SLEMERTAL GROUP GROUP —_> >

 

Ip

 

WOQSNIX

 