
V.

UE have seen the inferior Pitris who possess an astral body within an @ ethereal form, projecting that astral—their chhaya-—to form the mould for physical man, the ‘delicate model for the Nature Spirits of Matter to work upon ” (vol. i, p. 225). We have seen the Monad descend- ing and brooding over the senseless shell—the “* Double Dragon ” as it is sometimes called—as Atma-Buddhi (see the Commentaries, as quoted in vol. ii, p. 57). We may regard this First Race, the “Sons of Yoga,” as possessing but the Linga Sarira, the astral body, of man: ‘The Breath (human Monad) needed a form: the Fathers gave it” (Sloka, 17). The grosser body was moulded by the Earth forces through the first Three Races, growing denser and more compact as the ages revolved. Prana, the life- principle, the ‘electric fire”, came to it from the Sun: “the spirit of the Earth called to his help the Solar Fire . . . . the Breath needed the Spirit of Life: the Solar Lhas breathed it into its form” (Slokas, 16,17). The Commentary has the same thought: ‘They were the shadows of the shadows of the Lords. They expanded. The Spirits of the Earth clothed them ; the Solar Lhas warmed them ” (vol. ii, p. 109). This gift of physical life, of electric fire, by the Sun must not be confused with the higher gift of the “Solar Angels”, who bring Manas to the making of man. We are here wholly on the physical plane, and are concerned only with the building up of the Quaternary. When the “Solar Lhas” had *“ warmed them”, “the Breaths had life, but had no understanding", and so they continued till the Third Race. Nor was even speech found among the First Race, mindless as it was on our plane (vol. ii, p. 198). ‘The Monads which informed these empty shells remained as unconscious as when separated from their previous incomplete forms and vehicles” (vol. ii, p. 80), and to an unconscious Monad and a mindless shell no speech was possible. (The reader is asked to remember here that the Monads are not “ separate” entities, but rays from the One Universal Monad, which are conceived of by us as “ separate” only because of our ‘“avidya” or ignorance.)

Tue Seconp Race.

The Second Race, born under Brihaspati (Jupiter) on the Hyperborean Continent, reproduced itself so far as the early portion of it was concerned 408 LUCIFER.

—like so many other forms of early physical life—by budding, or gemma- tion, followed by expansion. Those who have seen the process, say in the Hydra, will understand how naturally from a form so much less solid than the Hydra, such gemmation would occur. It is universal in the early jelly-like forms of living things, and in more highly developed and more complex forms it is still preserved in the earliest stages of their existence. The egg from which the human foetus is to be developed has its mulberry stage, and everywhere we find fission among the primitive stages of living things. The idea of this universal form of reproduction as being that by which the Second Race appeared seems ludicrous only because people think of it as applying to the complex organism we know as ‘‘man”. But the beings of the Second Race preceded “ man” by many a million years: they were on the path of evolution towards man, but those boneless viscid indeterminate forms had nothing of what we call human about them, although they were the seed out of which thousands of millenniums later man was to evolve. They were of ‘ homogeneous substance”, with ‘structureless albumen body” (vol. ii, p. 164), the very type for such reproduction, and in fact such beings, without organs, could only thus reproduce their kind. The physical form had to evolve gradually “ from its ethereal, or what would now be called protoplasmic model”, and this primeval humanity, we are told, ‘had at first an ethereal—or, if so pre- ferred, a huge filamentoid, jelly-like, form, evolved by Gods or natural ‘forces’, which grew, condensed throughout millions of ages, and became gigantic in its physical impulse and tendency, until it settled into the huge physical form of the Fourth Race Man” (vol. ii, pp. 150, 151). Perhaps those who have ignorantly laughed at the ‘ Secret Doctrine” will explain what method of reproduction, save fission or gemmation, was available for these jelly-like structureless creatures. Mindless still they were, but the first faint dawn of a yet far-off consciousness appeared in them, for we read of their endowment “with the first primitive and weak spark (the germ of intelligence)” (vol. ii, p. 165), and of their making ‘ chant-like sounds, composed of vowels alone” (p. 198).

As the Second Race was evolving, the First Race was disappearing before conditions unsuited for its continued existence: ‘‘when the Race became old, the old waters mixed with the fresher waters ..... the outer of the First became the inner of the Second” (Sloka 21). The “men” of the First Race melted away, were absorbed into the firmer, thongh still viscid forms of the Second Race, becoming the lower principles of the evolving bodies (vol. ii, p. 121). The later Second Race, progeny of those produced by the First Race, are spoken of as ‘“ Sweat born” in the Commentary (vol. ii, p. 117), a poetical phrase for a form of reproduction which marks a step forward in evolution, but which may best be described in those with whom it was the characteristic type, the First Division of the Third Root Race. THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 409

THe Tuirp Race.

The Third Race, which was to become really human, was evolved on the vast continent of Lemuria, the third of the great continents of the globe, and was significantly born under Lohitanga, the fiery-bodied Venus, or Sukra (vol. ii, p. 29). As the physical shape condensed and hardened, it was no longer capable of gemmation: hence in the later Second and in the early Third Race reproduction consisted of the extrusion of a viscid cell, which by the process familiar to us as cell division without separation, grew into an oviform ball, developing—as does the spore of the plant— outside the body of the parent, into the mature form. As the Third Race evolved, the spore-like cell, or ‘‘ drop”, acquired the characteristic properties of the animal egg, such as we still find among oviparous animals, and the developing Humanity, from being sexless or asexual, became gradually bisexual or hermaphrodite, evolving organs, hardening in tissue and producing bones, passing in fact through what the modern scientist would call the reptilian and avian stages. The change to oviparous reproduction and to the growth of the endo-skeleton, marked during the two earlier divisions of the Third Race, leads on to the complete separation of the sexes in the third division, there being developed first ‘ beings in which the one sex predominated over the other, and finally distinct men and women” (vol. ii, p. 132). In fact the Races passed, during millions of years, along the path of development now swiftly trodden by man in the early months of intra-uterine life : the cell gemmation, the cell multiplication, the asexual fcetal form, the growth of bones, the stage of hermaphroditism, the separa- tion of the sexes. All these are familiar to every student of physiology: very strange, very wonderful, veiled in mystery as to causes although obvious as to effects; but no more strange, no more wonderful, no more mysterious, in the evolving Races than in the evolving individual. Nor is it irrational to speak of the Races as “human”. True, ‘‘men, during the First and Second Races, were not physical beings, but merely rudiments of the future men” (vol. ii, p. 108). But are not the germ cell, the sexless embryo, the hermaphrodite foetus, rightly described as human in that their goal is Perfect Man? Why then shall not the early stages of Humanity in the womb of Nature be recognised for what they are, and why should they not be named by their end, by the triumph towards which they are. working, the building up of Man? ,

With this separation of the sexes comes the critical point of evolution : man has become “ opposite polar forces, an equilibrized compound of Spirit and Matter, of the positive and the negative, of the male and the female ” (vol. ii, p. 84). He has now reached his human form, though it be yet “ gigantic and ape-like ’: he has evolved “the vehicle of desire, or Kama Rupa” (vol. ii, p, 116), taking on, in his progress, animal passions and physical organs, thus entering the field of struggle in which he is to ‘* become as Gods, knowing good and evil”, thus acquiring the knowledge without which 410 LUCIFER.

perfection cannot be. Out of the sinlessness of unconsciousness, through the soil and the mire of evil, onwards into perfect righteousness, such was the path marked out for the feet of man. In this Third Race began the battle, some 18,000,000 years ago. For now the Quaternary is complete: the physical body has taken its shape moulded on the Linga Sarira; Prana vivifies it, Kama fires it, Kama the gift of Suchi, the Sun, the “ Drainer of Waters” (Sloka 17), the last thing that the lower Powers could bestow on evolving man. Over this now perfected fleshly tabernacle still brooded the « Divine Pilgrim ", awaiting the last touch which should unite the Quaternary with the Duad, the incoming of the Ego, that with one hand should cling to Atma-Buddhi, the Higher Self, with the other touch the Lower Self, and so knit the sundered together. This is the work of the “Fire Dhyanis”, the “ Solar Pitris", the Agnishwatta. The Esotericist speaks of these as the Heart of the Dhyan-Chohanic Body (vol. ii, p. 91), and they are the three classes of the Arupa Pitris, intellectual and spiritual, while the remaining four classes were corporeal, material and devoid of intellect (pp. 93 and g1). These are the “one third of the Dhyanis” who were ** doomed by the law of Karma and evolution to be reborn (or incarnated) on earth” (p.93). Some, if not all of them, are alluded to as “ failures ” among the Dhyan Chohans: but ‘as these ‘failures’ are too far progressed and Spiritualised to be thrown back forcibly from Dhyan Chohanship into the vortex of a new primordial evolution through the lower kingdoms”, they “do not pass through the three kingdoms as do the lower Pitris; nor do they incarnate in man until the Third Root Race” (vol. i, p. 188). Else- where they are spoken of as “the Fifth Hierarchy—the mysterious beings that preside over the constellation Capricornus, Makara, or Crocodile”, whose task it is “to inform the empty and ethereal animal form and make of it the Rational Man ” (vol. i, p. 233). Yet again, they are “the celestial ‘ Ancestors’ (Entities from preceding worlds, called in India the Sishta)” who ‘step in on this our plane, as the Pitris had stepped in before them, for the formation of the physical or animal-man, and incarnate in the latter” (vol. i, p. 248).

The gradual entrance on the scene of these Manasic entities is described in the 24th Sloka:

“ The Sons of Wisdom, the Sons of Night, ready for vebirth, came down; they saw the vile forms of the First Third ; ‘we can choose’, said the Lords, ‘we have wisdom’. Some entered the chhaya. Some projected the Spark. Some deferred till the Fourth. From their own Rupa they filled the Kama. Those who entered became Arhats. Those who received but a spark remained destitute of knowledge ; the spark burned low. The Third remained mindless. Theiy Fivas were mot ready. These were set apart among the Seven. They became narrow-headed. The Third were veady. ‘In these shall we dwell’, said the Lords of the Flame” (vol. 1, pp. 18, 19).

Here the student must note the phrases, ‘‘ some entered’, ‘‘ some pro- jected the spark", We are in the early part of the Third Race. Ere yet the sexes were separated, the incarmmating “Sons of Wisdom” who THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 41t

“entered” produced by Kriyasakti the ‘‘ Sons of the Fire-Mist” or the “Sons of Will and Yoga". Of these the first is the ‘ Initiator”, the “ Great Sacrifice ", of whom here we cannot speak ; and in these incarnated the highest Dhyanis ‘to form the nursery for future human adepts” (consult vol. i, p. 207). Kriyasakti is ‘the mysterious power of thought which enables it to produce external, perceptible, phenomenal results by its own inherent energy. The ancients held that any idea will manifest itself externally, if one’s attention (and will) is deeply concentrated upon it; similarly an intense volition will be followed by the desired result " (vol. ii, p- 173). The men thus formed are apart from the course of human evolu- tion; set apart ere yet the struggle had begun. They take no share save as guides, helpers, teachers, in the onward march; in past Manvantaras they had fought their fight; and they incarnate anew to help others, not to progress themselves.

On the other hand, the men of the Third Race who only received the projected spark, as they were scarcely ready, are the average humanity (vol. ii. 167), now fighting its way upward; while the third section, who were “not ready”, the most backward of the Third Race, “ became narrow-headed " and are now the lowest human races, the Australian, the Bushmen, the least evolved South Sea Islanders. Of these the Australians are the only pure and direct descendants, the rest being mixed (vol. ii. P. 199, note).

With evolving ages came the separation of the sexes, and still many of the “Lords of the Flame” held back from incarnation and many of the men were still left mindless. They dwelt among the rapidly increasing lower animals, and in their senselessness they prostituted their newly- evolved sexual powers, mating with the brutes around them, and breeding monsters, ‘“‘a dumb race to keep the shame untold” (Sloka 32). Then they who had held back from incarnation saw the evil: “The Amanasa [without Manas] have defiled our future abodes. This is Karma. Let us dweil in the others. Let us teach them better lest worse should happen.” ‘Then all men became endowed with Manas. They saw the sin of the Mindless” (Slokas 34, 35).

This incarnation of the “ Lords of the Flame” marks the true beginning of Man, who is now the complete septenary—although the higher Triad is still latent, the full unfolding of Manas belonging to the Fifth Race, of Buddhi to the Sixth, and of Atma to the Seventh—and who has become an intellectual self-conscious being. In the early sub-races of the Third, man’s language “was only a slight improvement on the various sounds in Nature, on the cry of gigantic insects and of the first animals”, but in the latest Third articulate speech was developed, monosyllabic only, but still articulate, something more than mere emotional cries (vol. ii. p. 198). This was the speech of “the ‘golden-colored’ yellow-complexioned men, after their separation into sexes and the full awakening of their minds”. The yellow color here spoken of is “the color of the first solid 412 LUCIFER.

human race, which appeared after the middle of the Third Root Race— after its fall into generation " (vol. ii. p. 250); but the present yellow races (except the Australians) are descended from the early branches of the Fourth Root Race, and are of mixed Lemuro-Atlantean descent (vol. ii. P- 199, note).

With the appearance of intellectual life came “ material progress ”. Ruled and taught by the “ Sons of Will and Yoga”, the Lensurians built cities and founded the earliest civilisation, a civilisation whelmed under a flood, the memory of which gave rise to the world-wide traditions of a universal deluge. Two STuDENTS oF THE E. 5.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.

Q. The lower Quaternary is evolved in the first four races, Manas in the fifth race. Now, what is the position of Buddhi towards the present humanity? During the sixth race I can understand that it will incarnate in some way in Manas, as manasa-putra now does in the lower quaternary.

But what of the manasa-putras who are now undergoing incarnation in us, ourselves in fact; are we as manasa-putras at present unfitted to receive Buddhi, and only now preparing for its reception, as the lower quaternary did for manasa- putra

If this be the case we are ‘‘ Buddhiless ”, as the early races were ‘ mindless ”.

Is this what it is to become “ Dwija ''\—twice-born, when a Buddhi takes possession and illuminates Manas ? Ss.

A. The lower Quaternary is evolved during the first three Races, the physical body not being regarded as a “principle” in the real sense of the term. The Monad—Atma-Buddhi—as has been so fully explained, broods over this evolving Quaternary, but cannot come into contact with it until Manas enters and draws them into connexion. This month's article will, perhaps, make this clearer to you. Buddhi is latent in present humanity, but you cannot speak of it as “ incarnating” in Manas: Manas is not fleshly. Further, Manas aspires towards Buddhi, Buddhi does not stoop to Manas. Buddhi will become active during the Sixth Race, but you do not seem to understand that the Monad is Atma-Buddhi.

If you refer to p. 167, vol. ii, “Secret Doctrine”, you will see that it distinctly states that “those who were half ready", who received but a spark, constitute average humanity. Therefore it is incorrect to say that we are the Manasaputras. Weare the Pitris and received a spark from the Manasaputras. Those in whom the Manasaputras, as such, incarnate, do not belong to our average humanity. Dwija means an initiated one— or a being whose Higher Ego is active; the initiated Brahmins of old were called Dwijas.

 THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 499

asked to give life to the ‘king’: ‘O weeper, thou powerful one, high in the realms of Aukert, give life to the King’. ... He also receives this invocation: ‘O thou, he who forms himself by his tears, who hears himself his own words, who reanimates his soul, reanimate the soul of the King'. Finally in a famous text known as the text of the four races, men are thus addressed: ‘Ye are a tear of my eye in your name of Retu, that is to say in your name of men’.... This doctrine is still more clearly affirmed in a magic papyrus translated by Dr. Birch, where the tears of different Gods are represented as the matter from which issue flowers, incense, bees, water, salt, &. ‘When Horus weeps’, says the papyrus, ‘the water which falls from his eyes, grows into plants, which produce a sweet perfume. When Su and Tefnut weep greatly, and water falls from their eyes, it changes into plants which produce incense. ... When the sun weeps a second time, and lets water fall from his eyes, it changes into bees, which work. ... When the sun Ra becomes feeble, the perspiration falls from his timbs, and changes into a liquid . . . . his blood changes to salt. When the sun becomes feeble, he sweats, water falls from his mouth and changes into plants’.” Compare also the “ Sweat-born" of the Secret Doctrine.

(To be continued.)