
Theosophical Gleanings,

NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”.

IV.

7 E now fix our attention on the lowest of the four planes on which ME is our planetary chain, on the terrestrial; and we commence the study of the evolution of globe D, our Earth, during its period of activity in the Fourth Round. Let us glance at the broad outlines ere we fill in the details.

When for the fourth time globe D begins its period of activity, it has reached very considerable solidity as compared with its state during the previous Rounds, and it continues to densify until it reaches the mid-most period of its life, the lowest point of its cycle. Be it noted also that this lowest point of the fourth globe on the Fourth Round, is the lowest point also of the whole planetary chain, its deepest sinking into matter. That 306 LUCIFER.

point once passed, life begins its upward climb, never again to sink so low during the Manvantaric cycle. ‘Our Earth... . hastolive.... through seven Rounds. During the first three, it forms and consolidates ; during the fourth it settles and hardens; during the last three it gradually returns to its first ethereal form” (vol. i, p. 159).

Seven Races of Men are to be evolved for the indwelling of the “Eternal Pilgrim”; these, in their physical frames—like their globe— densifying during the evolution of three and a-half Races, touching their densest point midway in the Fourth Race, and climbing up towards spirit during the latter three and a-half. “They commence with the ethereal and end with the spiritual on the double line of physical and moral evolution — from the beginning of the terrestrial round to its close” (vol. i, p. 160). Man, we are told, “in his gradual consolidation, developed pari passe with the earth..... For the earth was in a comparatively ethereal condition before it reached its last consoli- dated state; the archaic teachings, moreover, telling us that, during the middle period of the Lemuro-Atlantean Race, three and a-half Races after the genesis of man, the earth, man, and everything in the globe was of a still grosser and more material nature..... The cycles that intervened since then, have already carried us onward, on the opposite ascending arc, some steps towards our dematerialisation, as the Spiritualists would say” (vol. ii, p. 250). During this sinking from the ethereal to the grossly material, the Races evolve the lower Quaternary ; Manas evolves fully only in the Fifth Race; Buddhi will appear fully only in the Sixth, and Atma will be revealed fully only in the Seventh. (The word ‘ fully” is used only in a relative sense, relative to the Fourth Round. The perfect manifestation of Atma belongs to the Seventh Race in the Seventh Round.)

These Seven Races are spoken of as Root Races; ‘Each Root Race has seven sub-races. Each sub-race has, in its turn, seven ramifications, which may be called branch, or family, races. The little tribes, shoots, and offshoots of the last-named are countless” (Vol. ii, p. 434, ‘and see diagram on same page). A family race of our Fifth Race has an average life of about 30,000 years, giving approximately 210,000 to each of our sub-races, and 1,470,000 to our Race. But this is only a rough computa- tion of the time during which it may be said to be in possession of the earth; for Races, sub-races, and family races overlap each other's exist- ences, some of the Third and Fourth Races yet surviving, although our Fifth Race has swayed the destinies of Humanity for some 1,000,000 years (consult vol. ii, p. 435).

It may perhaps be wise to here remind the student of a pitfall into which he may unwarily stumble. Occasionally he will come across the statement that “the human race” has existed on earth for 18,000,000 years. But he will blunder if he takes this as giving the date of the appearance of the First Race. It is the date of the midpoint of the THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 307

Third Race, when Manas first entered some of the human shells and made them Men (vol. ii, pp. 254, 255). Before this “the Inner Man was not”, as the Stanza has it, and without this Man is not truly man. Beyond that 18,000,000 years “man, or his filmy image, may have existed for 300 million years, for all we know” (vol. ii, p. 251), evolving through the First and the Second Races and the first half of the Third.

The physical conformation of the earth varies as the Races successively evolve. As there are Seven Races in the evolution of Humanity, so are there Seven Continents in the physical evolution of the globe. The first of these seven, “ the first tevva_firma on which the first Race was evolved", is “the Imperishable Sacred Land”, called imperishable because it ‘is stated never to have shared the fate of the other continents; because it is the only one whose destiny it is to last from the beginning to the end of the Manvantara throughout each Round” (vol. ii, p. 6). The whole earth was then “one vast watery desert’ save for this land at the North Pole, “which crowns the North Pole like a skull-cap” and “is the only one which prevails during the whole Manvantara of our Round. All the central continents will emerge from the sea-bottom many times in turn, but this land will never change” (vol. ii, p. 400, note). “If, then, the teaching is understood correctly, the first, continent which came into existence capped over the whole North Pole like one unbroken crust, and remains so to this day, beyond that inland sea which seemed like an unreachable mirage to the few Arctic travellers who perceived it” (p. 401). {The student will find himself rewarded if he endeavors to trace the connexion between this land, and Mount Meru, and the “ Solitary Watcher ”’.] The Second Continent is the Hyperborean, stretching south- ward and westward from the North Pole, comprising the north of Asia and Europe (vol. ii, p. 7). It embraced Greenland, Spitzbergen, Sweden, Norway, and the adjoining lands (p. 775). ‘‘ During the Second Race more land emerged from under the waters as a continuation of the ‘ head’ from the neck. Beginning on both hemispheres, on the line above the most Northern part of Spitzbergen, on Mercator's Projection, on our side, it may have included, on the American side, the localities that are now occupied by Baffins Bay and the neighboring islands and promontories. There it hardly reached, southward, the 7oth degree of latitude ; here it formed the horse-shoe continent of which the commentary speaks; of the two ends of which one included Greenland with a prolongation which crossed the soth degree a little south-west; and the other Kamschatka; the two ends being united by what is now the Northern fringe of the coasts of Eastern and Western Siberia. This broke asunder and disappeared” (vol. ii, pp. 401, 402). This portion of the earth had then no winter, and enjoyed an almost tropical climate. It was the “ Land of the Eternal Sun”, and portions left of it still yield to the geologist fossilised remnants of its former flora, fossils which bear witness to the time when Greenland bore the Magnolia and Walnut tree, and was the dwelling of the Second 308 LUCIFER.

Race (vol. ii, pp. 11, 12). The Third Continent is Lemuria, in which was the “ Sacred Himavat", the Himalayan range, which then rose above the sea. It stretched across the Indian Ocean to Australia, and northward included the remaining parts of the Second Continent, Sweden and Norway, Eastern and Western Siberia and Kamschatka; ‘it included the whole area of space from the foot of the Himalayas, which separated it from the inland sea rolling its waves over what is now Thibet, Mon- golia, and the great desert of Schamo (Gobi); from Chittagong, westward to Hardwar, and eastward to Assam. From thence it stretched south across what is known to us as Southern India, Ceylon and Sumatra ; then, embracing on its way as we go south, Madagascar on its right hand and Australia and Tasmania on its left, it ran down to within a few degrees of the Antarctic Circle; when from Australia, an inland region on the Mother Continent in those ages, it extended far into the Pacific Ocean, not only beyond Rapa-nui (Teapy, or Easter Island) which now lies in latitude 26 S. and longitude 110 W.” On the Atlantic side, Lemuria ‘‘extended in the shape of a horseshoe past Madagascar, round ‘South Africa’ (then a mere fragment in process of formation) through the Atlantic up to Norway. The great English freshwater deposit called the Wealden— which every geologist remarks as the mouth of a former great river—is the bed of the main stream which drained Northern Lemuria in the Secondary Age.” The Eastern portion of this ‘ gigantic continent .... has now wholly disappeared beneath the waters of the Pacific, leaving here and there only some of its highland tops which are now islands” (vol. ii, pp. 7, 401, 402, 333, 323, 324). Here dwelt the Lemurian Race, and on some of the fragments which yet remain dwell their deteriorated descendants to-day. The Fourth Continent is Atlantis, of which Plato’s island was a remnant (vol. ii, p. 7). It was ‘‘a large continent, first divided, and then broken later on into seven peninsulas and islands. .... It covered the whole of the North and South Atlantic regions, as well as portions of the North and South Pacific and had islands even in the Indian Ocean (relics of Lemuria)” (p- 405). ‘The Atlantic portion of Lemuria was the geological basis of what is generally known as Atlantis. The latter, indeed, must be regarded rather as a development of the Atlantic prolongation of Lemuria, than as an entirely new mass of land upheaved to meet the special requirements of the Fourth Root Race” (p. 333). The ‘continent was formed by the coalescence of many islands and peninsulas which were upheaved in the ordinary course of time, and became ultimately the true home of the great Race known as the Atlantean” (p. 334). The Fifth Continent was America in point of time, but Europe and Asia Minor have received the name, since they were almost co-equal with America, and it is on them that the Fifth Race has arisen (p. 8). A mass of facts gathered from scientific text books in support of the existence of the Third and Fourth Continents, will be found in the “‘ Secret Doctrine”.

On each of these Continents its Race is evolved in seven different THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 309

groups, each group at its own centre, the seven groups forming the collective “‘ Man” (see vol. ii, p. 177, 249). The relics of the Third Round, ‘projected into objectivity when terrestrial activity recommences”, yield the “rough material” for the lower kingdoms (p. 731): while the Dhyan Chohanic impulse is ‘the inherent and necessary law of development”, lying “‘ behind all minor agencies "—such as natural and sexual selection, correlation of growth, etc.—which impels to progress (p. 738). The Laurentian, Cambrian, and Silurian systems of geology contain the relics of the Third Round in their fossilised animals (p. 712); this will not seem surprising to the reader who remembers that “ during the interim from one Round to another the globe and everything on it remain in statu quo” (note on p. 713).

When the earth awakes from its pralayic sleep to tread its fourth cycle, the mineral kingdom is thus formed, and the vegetable is partly evolved ere Man appears: “ Arrived on our earth at the commencement of the Fourth in the present series of life-cycles and races, Man is the first form that appears thereon, being preceded only by the mineral and vegetable kingdoms—even the latter having to develop and continue its further evolution through man” (vol i, p. 159). This Round is the especial Round of Humanity, so to speak, ‘Its Humanity develops only in the Fourth— our present round. Up to this Fourth Life-Cycle, it is referred to as ‘humanity’ only for lack of a more appropriate term. Like the grub which becomes chrysalis and butterfly, Man, or rather that which becomes Man, passes through all the forms and kingdoms during the First Round and through all the human shapes during the two following Rounds” (vol. i, P- 159).

And here let the student note how his path may be smoothed by re- membering the correspondences between the planetary and the terrestrial life-cycles : for the first three-and-a-half Races, as for the first three-and-a- half Rounds, man is ‘ man” only by courtesy and by destiny. The Fourth Race, like the Fourth Round, shows man as ‘‘man”. He also is forming and consolidating during the first three Races, with his globe, repeating on the small cycle the evolution of the large; during the Fourth Race he and it settle and harden; during the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Races, he and it gradually return to the ethereal form. Thus by knowing what we are told as to the Rounds, we could well-nigh work out for ourselves the stages in the Races, these little Wheels revolving like the large.

In studying the evolution of Man on globe D it must ever be kept in mind that it is the one of the central truths of occult teaching that man’s life is not confined to this world. As was well put in an article in the Theosophist of October, 1882: ‘‘ The evolution of man is not a process carried out on this planet alone. It is a result to which many worlds in different conditions of material and spiritual development have con- tributed”. If this thought be realised, with all that it implies, the origina! failure of Earth to evolve him, and the gradual building up of Man, 310 LUCIFER.

as we know him, by the progressing entities who, as Man, are to progress further, will become intelligible. The “Lunar Pitris" who project their chhayas for the mould of his physical form, are but one set of these entities, and build themselves thus into man; the ‘“ Lords of the Flame” who bring the gift of Manas are but the Principles which become the re-incarnating Ego of Man; they seek, as man, their further progress. Earth alone cannot build man: the Pitris alone cannot complete him; the Sons of Mind alone cannot clothe him. All these must unite to evolve him, because man is one of the stages of the Universal Evolution of Life: all must be growing towards, passing through, or growing from the stage we know as “human”; and as the chemical elements might be poetically figured as combining first to form the simple mineral, then additional ones entering in to form the vegetable, then others again entering to produce the animal, so the varied life-forms of our universe enter one after another into the making of Man, until he stands, the perfect septenary, to progress upwards ever, in higher and higher stages of evolving life.

Ere THE ComInG oF MAN.

Strange were the throes of Mother Earth through millions of years, ere yet she was ready to be the home of the human race. ‘ From her own bosom” she evolved strange monsters, formed of the relics of the previous Rounds, monsters which writhed and fought in those dim formless ages, when earth was well-nigh as Chaos, and nature had but a’prentice hand. Her efforts were a failure when she strove to produce man. No fit dwelling could she make for the Eternal Pilgrim, for him who needed more the physical coat of skin. An inclination of the earth's axis caused a deluge, and all the monstrous forms were swept away from an earth now ready for

Tue First Race.

“In the first beginnings of [human] life, the only dry land was on the Right End of the sphere wheve it is motionless [the North Pole). The whole earth was one vast watery desert, and the waters were tepid .... There man was born on the seven zones of the immortal, the indestructible of the Manvantara” (vol. ii, p. 400). So says one of ‘the Commentaries” of the coming of Man. Here appeared the primordial human group, “born” under the Sun (vol. ii, p. 29), dwellings for the Monads awaiting incarnation. These dwellings, however, were but the astral forms, the chhayas, or shadows of the Lunar Pitris, projected by the latter to serve as the mould, so to speak, of physical man. It was ‘a luminous incorporeal form, over which, like the molten brass round the clay model of the sculptor, the physical frame of his body was built by, through, and from the lower forms and types of animal terrestria\ life” (vol. ii, p. 112). These first men “were then simply the images, the astral doubles, of their Fathers, who were the pioneers, or the most progressed entities from a preceding though lower sphere, the shell of whicki THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 311

is now our moon” (vol. ii. 115). They were the seven primordial men, evolved by the seven Pitris, mindless, mere shells; for the ‘Solar Angels”, the Lords of the Flame, elsewhere called the Agnishwatta, the Kumaras, “would not yet create”, iz., the time had not yet come for Manas to incarnate in the human form. In the Hindu nomen- clature the Lunar Pitris who project their shadows are the Barhishad, full of creative fire ; the Agnishwatta, who are without this creative fire but who hold in reserve the gift of Manas, the Spiritual Flame, are those who at first refuse to join in ‘‘the making of man”. ‘Yet it is they alone who could complete man, #.¢., make of him a self-conscious, almost a divine being—a God on earth. The Barhishad, though possessed of creative fire, were devoid of the higher Mahat-mic element. Being ona level with the lower principles—those which precede gross objective matter—they could only give birth to the outer man, or rather to the model of the physical, the astral man. Thus, though we see them intrusted with the task by Brahma& (the collective Mahat or universal Divine Mind), the ‘ mystery of creation’ is repeated on Earth, only in an inverted sense, asin a mirror. It is those who are unable to create the spiritual immortal man, who project the senseless model (the Astral) of the physical Being ” (vol. ii, p. 79).

Thus we see formed this first quasi-human race, an ethereal sexless form, into which the “earth-spirits” before spoken of are to build the atoms of the more substantial body of the future. It is the commencement of the physical evolution of the present Round on our globe, the Monad brooding over the senseless shell, the form that was ‘like a roof with no walls, nor pillars to rest upon” (Commentary, quoted vol. ii, p. 57), and on which it could have “no hold’, This was all “the Fathers”, the Lunar Pitris, could do towards the making of man : they could fashion the “ body of illusion”, they could project the form, they could mould the shape: but not theirs to give the indwelling Mind that should inform the helpless shell, that Spark that hangs from the Flame, without which man’s bodily frame is dark as the brute’s, without which the Eternal Pilgrim could not enter the dwelling made for his reception.

Two STUDENTS oF THE E, S.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.

We have received the following questions, and append them with replies.

On page 211 of Lucifer you say: “It is some of these (Manasa Dhyanis) who are destined to incarnate as the Egos of the forthcoming crop of humanity.” What would be the nature of this incarnation? Do you mean as an entirely separate and new race, having no connection with the race of Egos at present incarnated and evolving ; or blending into one-ness with them, as the Higher Ego may be conjoined with the lower? Or, in other words, are these our higher Egos, already destined to incarnate in our future personalities ? X.Y.Z

A. The incarnation is the passing of Manas into the Quaternary evolved for its reception ; you will understand this when it is reached in the THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 407

Theosophical Gleanings, OR NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”,
