

Eee

Cheasophical Gleanings,

NOTES ON THE “SECRET DOCTRINE”.

VI. Tue Tuirp Race (Continued).

Me" have taken a bird’s-eye view of the life-cycle of the Third Race: e we must now study its evolution in fuller detail.

The Third Race divides itself naturally into three main groups, under which are classified the seven sub-races and their innumerable divisions. The first of these groups takes its rise in those spoken of last month as those into whom the “Lords of the Flame” “entered”, ere yet the differen- tiation into sexes had come about. These, with the progeny produced by Kriyasakti—the “ Sons of the Fire-Mist”, or the ‘Sons of Will and Yoga” —make up the first and highest group. It is the men of this group who are alluded to in the traditions of every nation as ‘“ demigods ", “ heroes”, and “rishis”, &c. To this group belong ‘‘ the seven Rishis” of the Hindu allegory (vol. ii, p. 78), the sons of Vasishta-Daksha. It includes Nirmana- kayas from other Manvantaras, whom we see, “in all the Puranas, re- appearing on this globe, in the third Manvantaya, as Kings, Rishis, and heroes” (vol. ii, p. 94). ‘ They sacrificed themselves for the good and salvation of the Monads which were waiting for their turn, and which otherwise would have had to linger for countless ages in irresponsible, animal-like, though in appearance human, forms” (vol. ii, p. 94). These Soo LUCIFER.

are “that third and holy race”, consisting of those men who are spoken of as at the zenith of the race, who were “towering giants of godly strength and beauty, and the depositaries of all the mysteries of heaven andearth”. . . . “ The chief gods and heroes of the Fourth and Fifth Races, as of later antiquity, are the deified images of these men of the Third " (vol. ii, pp. 171, 172). This group is said to have inhabited “an island, which for its unparalleled beauty had no rival inthe world. . . . This word, which is no word, has travelled once round the globe, and still lingers as a far-off dying echo in the hearts of some privileged men. The hierophants of all the Sacerdotal Colleges were aware of the existence of this island; but ‘the word’ was known only to the Java Alkim (Maha Chohan in another tongue), or chief lord of every college, and was passed to his successor only at the moment of death. . . . There was no communication with the fair island by sea, but subterranean passages, known only to the chiefs, communicated with it in all directions” (vol. ii, Pp. 220).

Over against this loftiest group of the Third Race comes the lowest group, that of the “ mindless ", sometimes spoken of as “ the eighth race”, because it went so far astray from the field of humanity, “the animal man” (vol. i, p. 650). We spoke of these on p. 411 of last month’s Lucifer, and we need only note in this connexion that the semi-human group was rein- forced by later crossings of Lemurians and Atlanteans with these semi- human tribes, and that Esoteric Ethnology ascribes this origin for Tas- manians, Australians, Andaman Islanders, a hair-covered mountain tribe in China, the wild men of Borneo, the Veddahs of Ceylon, the Bushmen, Negritos, and some others (see vol. ii, pp. 195, 196, with the footnotes).

It is to this group, in some of its lowest ramifications, that the Secret Doctrine ascribes the origin of the anthropoids. “It is in the suddenly arrested evolution of certain sub-races, and their forced and violent diver- sion into the purely animal line by artificial cross-breeding, truly analogous to the hybridization which we have now learned to utilise in the vegetable and animal kingdoms, that we have to look for the origin of the anthropoids. In these red-haired and hair-covered monsters, the fruit of the unnatural connexion between men and animals, the ‘ Lords of Wisdom’ did not incarnate, as we see. Thus by a long series of transformations due to unnatural cross-breeding (unnatural ‘sexual selection’), originated in due course of time the lowest specimens of humanity; while further bestiality and the fruit of their first animal efforts of reproduction begat a species which developed into mammalian apes ages later. The Commentary explains that the apes are the only species, among the animals, which has gradually and with every generation and variety tended more and more to return to the original type of its male forefather—the dark gigantic Lemurian and Atlantean” (vol. ii. pp. 200, 201, and footnote). As this question of relationship between man and the ape is one on which Esoteric and Exoteric Science seem to come sharply into conflict, it may be well to THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 5OY

delay on it fora moment. And first we must point out that no scientist speaks of man as “ descended from the ape”. That is a popular mis- conception. Darwin and his followers allege that ‘‘ man” and the apes are descended from a common ancestor, that man ‘is the co-descendant with other mammals of a common progenitor" (‘* Descent of Man,” p. 607, ed. 1875). Against this general statement Esoteric Science has nothing to say, but— different as he was from the ‘*man” of the present—Esoteric Science speaks of that common progenitor as ‘‘man”, having in view the chief product evolved from him (see Lucifer, p. 409). Speaking of man in the Third Round, ‘almost exactly repeated in the third Root-Race of the Fourth Round”, a Mahatma describes him as in ‘the form of a giant-ape, and now more intelligent, or rather cunning, than spiritual”. In the last half ‘his gigantic stature decreases and his body improves in texture, and he becomes a more rational being, though still more an ape than a Deva” (vol. 1. pp. 188, 189). This ‘‘giant-ape” is the ‘common progenitor”. Further, the Mahatma says: ‘* The human feetus follows now in its trans- formations all the forms that the physical frame of man had assumed throughout the three Kalpas (Rounds), during the tentative efforts at plastic formation around the Monad by senseless, because imperfect matter, in her blind wanderings. In the present age the physical embryo is a plant, a reptile, an animal, before it finally becomes man” (vol. 1, p. 184). On the details of the evolution there is clashing enough between the Eastern and the Western teachings; but as all the details are confessedly matter of hypothesis in the West, as the leading evolutionists are at issue about them, and as new theories are being constantly put forward, the West cannot claim to dogmatise here over the East. All that Western Science lays down as essential, in order to explain undeniable facts, is the unity of origin of all mammals: all else is admittedly doubtful. The Eastern Science lays down the same postulate, and also traces, as it alleges with full knowledge, the details of the further evolution. And those who note how in point after point Western Science is approaching doctrines long taught by the Esoteric, will be content to possess their souls in patience amid the clash of warring tongues, waiting until fuller knowledge has brought about greater har- mony. The fundamental difference between the Esoteric and the Exoteric Science is not on the physical but on the mental evolution of man. They may join hands on the giant-ape form, and the cunning of the common progenitor: but to the Esotericist the mind is an informing principle; to the Scientist it is but a product of the brain. ‘Man is certainly ne special creation, and he is the product of Nature’s gradual perfective work, like any other living unit on this earth. But this is only with regard to the human tabernacle. That which lives and thinks in man and survives that frame, the masterpiece of evolution, is the ‘ Eternal Pilgrim’, the Protean differentiation in space and time of the One Absolute ‘ Unknowable’” (vol. ii, p. 728).

The remaining group, consisting of ‘‘the last sub-races of the Third 502 LUCIFER.

Root-Race” (vol. ii, p. 765), is midway between the highest and the lowest, and, as the stock of our humanity, is of special interest to us. They “were the “ancestors of the Atlanteans, . . . ape-like, intel- lectually senseless giants” (vol. i, p. 191), whose very senselessness made possible such an off-shoot as the third group, and who were rescued from general degradation by their endowment with Manas. These were the first sexual, physical men, the date of whose appearance on our globe is put by the Esoteric Chronology 18,000,000 years ago. They are the root of our physical Humanity, of which the Fourth Race, the Atlantean, may be regarded as the trunk. Physical changes in the globe accompanied the changes in man, and the period of warfare began. Differentiation into sex meant struggle in lieu of harmony, and all physical nature sympathised in the altered conditions.

“ The eternal spring became constant change and seasons succeeded. Cold forced men to build shelters and devise clothing. Then man appealed to the superior Fathers. The Nirmanakayas of the Nagas, the wise Serpents and Dragons of Light came, and the precursors of the Enlightened. Divine kings descended and taught men sctences and arts, for men could live no longer in the first land, which had become a white frozen corpse” (vol. ii, p. 201).

It was under the guidance of this Highest Group of the Third Race that the later Third, or Lemurians, developed their civilization. They, “under the guidance of their divine Rulers, built large cities, cultivated arts and sciences, and knew astronomy, architecture, and mathematics to perfection. This primeval civilization did not, as one may think, imme- diately follow their physiological transformation. Between the final evolution and the first city built many hundred thousands of years had passed. Yet, we find the Lemurians in their sixth sub-race building their first rock-cities out of stone and Java. One of such great cities of primitive structure was built entirely of lava, some thirty miles west from where Easter Island now stretches its narrow piece of sterile ground, and was entirely destroyed by a series of volcanic eruptions. The oldest remains of Cyclopean buildings were all the handiwork of the Lemurians of the last sub-races; and an occultist shows therefore no wonder on learning that the stone relics, found on the small piece of land called Eastern Island by Captain Cook, are ‘ very much like the walls of the Temple of Pachacamac or the Ruins of Tia-Kuanuco in Peru’, and that they are in the Cyclopean style” (vol. ii, p. 317). Thus civilization slowly grew up among the Lemurians; some, we are told, led a “ nomadic and patriarchal life”, some builded cities and progressed in the arts and sciences; Easter Island belonged to the earliest civilisation of the Third Race”, and the strange statues there felt the touch of Lemurian hands. It is interesting to note that, approaching the subject from an entirely distinct point of view, Haeckel places primitive man in Lemuria: ‘Probably Southern Asia itself was not the earliest cradle of the human race; but Lemuria, a continent that lay to the south of Asia, and sank later on beneath the THEOSOPHICAL GLEANINGS. 503

surface of the Indian Ocean” (** The Pedigree of Man,” p. 73, Eng. Trans., 1883).

It is to the Lemurians that must be referred the many traditions of the ‘one-eyed Cyclopes”; the ‘‘one eye” is the Wisdom Eye, the Third Eye, the Eye of Siva, which was in full activity at that period of human history, the two front eyes being fully developed only at the beginning of the Fourth Race (see vol. ii, p. 769). The mythological three Cyclopes, sons of Heaven and Earth, are the last three sub-races of the Third Race.

As the centuries rolled slowly on, the Lemurians gradually drifted apart into two well-defined and marked classes, the Sons of Darkness and the Sons of Light, between whom bitter antagonism was developed. As the decay of the race proceeded, the division became more and more marked, and simultaneously with the decay of the Third appeared the rising of the Fourth Race. Emerging from the ocean westwards and northwards were the beginnings of a new continent, the Atlantis of the coming Race, and as the Northern Lemurians spread westwards the first sub-race of the Fourth, the Lemuro-Atlanteans, were gradually evolved and spread from the Atlantic portion of Lemuria over the new land; losing, as time went on the characteristics of the parent stock, and developing the pure Atlantean type. “The Atlantic portion of Lemuria was the geological basis of what is generally known as Atlantis. The latter, indeed, must be regarded rather as a development of the Atlantic prolongation of Lemuria, than as an entirely new mass of land upheaved to meet the special requirements of the Fourth Root-Race. Just as in the case of Race-evolution, so in that of the shifting and re-shifting of continental masses, no hard and fast line can be drawn where a new order ends and another begins. Continuity in natural processes is never broken. Thus the Fourth Race Atlanteans were developed from a nucleus of Northern Lemurian Third Race men, centred, roughly speaking, toward a point of land in what is now the mid-Atlantic Ocean. Their continent was formed by the coalescence of many islands and peninsulas which were upheaved in the ordinary course of time and became ultimately the true home of the great Race known as the Atlantean” (vol. ii, pp. 333, 334).

Some of these Lemuro-Atlanteans, we are told, intermarried with the mindless race, and so entered on a path of rapid physical and psychical degeneration. Meanwhile vast seismic changes were in progress: the continent of Lemuria had broken up into smaller continents, and its immense extent “which once had reigned supreme over the Indian, Atlantic and Pacific Oceans now consisted of huge islands which were gradually disappearing one after the other, until the final convulsion engulfed the last remains of it” (vol. ii, p. 327). Volcanic action was the chief feature in this destruction, volcanic fires breaking up the continent and causing vast chasms, into which rushed the sea, submerging the scathed and ruined land. There can be no doubt that the traditions of a universal deluge found in the islands of Polynesia—the mountain tops of the highest Lemurian ranges— 504 LUCIFER.

have their origin in these gigantic cataclysms, which separated these islands from the rest of the habitable world.* “The sinking and transformation of Lemuria beginning nearly at the Arctic Circle (Norway), the Third Race ended its career in Lanka, or rather on that which became Lanka with the Atlanteans. The small remnant now known as Ceylon is the Northern highland of ancient Lanka” (vol. ii, p. 332). Of this race there remained only the “animal men”, a few scattered remnants that had.escaped here and there, the Lemuro-Atlantean stock, and the Highest Group, that the earth-convulsions could not touch. The human stock, or seed, in the Hindu allegory, is saved by Vaivasvata Manu; “ Lemuria is said to have perished about 700,000 years before the commencement of what is now called the Tertiary Age (the Eocene), and it is during this deluge also—an actual geological deluge this time—that Vaivasvata Manu is again shewn as saving mankind (allegorically it is mankind, or a portion of it, the Fourth Race, which is saved); so also he saves the Fifth Race during the destruction of the last Atlanteans” (vol. ii, p. 313).

This Vaivasvata Manu “figures as a generic character, under various circumstances and events” (vol. ii, p. 145), for he is “the primitive Root- Manu of our fourth human wave (the reader must always remember that Manu is not a man, but collective humanity)”; further, the name is applied as a racial term to the Root-Manu of the Fourth Root-Race, thus denoting one of the Minor Manus (vol. ii, p. 309). His varied appearances on the scene in Exoteric traditions and allegories need not therefore disturb

the student. Two STuDENTS oF THE E. S,

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS.

Q. Are our Monads an emanation of the Holy Spirit? By that I mean the totality of Gods, who form the Absolute, the One.

A. We should avoid the term ‘Holy Spirit”, because it conveys the idea of a Personal God. The Monads are sparks from the one Fire, the Universal Life (see Lucifer, p. 138).

Q. The entities that collectively form Atma, Buddhi, Mahat, are they these Monads? are our Higher Selves spiritual hierarchies, of whom we are only the reflection, the emanation?

A. The Monad is Atma-Buddhi (see Luctfer, p. 138). Mahat is Kosmic Ideation (see Lucifer, pp. 56, 57). If you mean Manas, Manas is not the Monad, as you must surely see if you have read the ‘ Gleanings” with any attention (note specially pp. 311 and 410). Certainly our Higher Selves are a Spiritual Hierarchy, but you cannot call the lower quaternary an emanation from them. The building up of this has been very carefully described step by step.

* The more widely spread traditions found elsewhere—as in Mexico, India, Asia Minor, &c.—are traceable to the floods which destroyed Atlantis, NOTES ON THEOSOPHY AND EDUCATION. 505
