V. I, p. 119, line 7.
THE HUMAN MONAD is the union of the ray from the absolute with the soul. V. I, p. 119, para. 1.
SYMBOLISM AND NUMBERS. They are intimately connected with the hosts of the Dhyan-Chohans. The basic numbers refer each to distinct groups of ideas which vary according to the group of Dhyan Chohans referred to. In other places the author says that, as the Dhyani are connected with evolution in all its intricacies and mysteries, it follows that symbolism is of the highest importance. V. I, p. 119, (b).
THE ONE FUNDAMENTAL LAW OF OCCULT SCIENCE is “the radical unity of the ultimate essence of each constituent part of compounds in Nature—from Star to mineral Atom, from the highest Dhyan Chohan to the smallest infusoria.” And this is to be applied spiritually, intellectually, and physically. V. I, p. 120, last para.
KARMA NEEDS MATERIAL AGENCIES to carry out its decrees. V. I. p. 123, line 2. The material agents spoken of here are not merely those that we class as such, but many others which are generally conceived of by us as spiritual. For, as said above, even Buddhi is material when compared with At-man of which it is the vehicle. The clue here given is in regard to the operations of Karma through the atoms that are used by the egos in their various incarnations. But in following this out it must not be forgotten that there is no particle or point of materiality which is not at the same time mixed with or in company with another particle—if the word may be used for this purpose—of spirit or the one life.
THE THREE GROUPS OF BUILDERS. These are as follows: The first is the group which constructs the entire system as a whole and which includes more than this globe system; the second is the group of builders who come in when the system as a great whole is ready and form the planetary chain of this earth; and the third is that group which builds
 

 
or projects Humanity, as they are the great type of the microcosm— man. V. I, p. 128, second para.
THE LIPIKA AS COMPARED WITH THE BUILDERS are the great Spirits of the universe as a whole, the builders being of a special nature. The Lipika, like the others, are divided into three groups, but it is asserted that only the lowest of these three groups has to do with this system of ours and that the other two cannot be known, and also that those two are so high that it is doubtful if even the highest of the Adepts know about them. It may therefore be supposed that for the Adepts the Lipika of the higher degrees are as great a mystery as the Ma- hatmas are for us, and that this ascending scale of greatness ever gives to the soul something still higher, no matter how far it may progress, to which to look and aspire. V. I, see whole of page 128.
But as each of the three groups is divided into seven others (/?. 127), it may be the 21st sub-group which has to do with this globe; and it is said that as to the highest of the groups
it is directly connected with our karma. V. I, p. 128, last line. Now as Karma rules the entire universe, it must follow, in order to make and keep harmony, that the “highest grade of Lipika” referred to on page 128 is not the highest of the last series of 21 sub-groups, but the highest of the whole three great groups.
NOTE WELL. Whenever an “entity” is spoken of among the various “hosts” it is to be known as composed of many entities, just as man himself is similarly constituted, his total consciousness being that of the whole mass of beings who go to make up his intricate life.


From PAGES 128 TO 160, VOL. I
NIRMANAKAYAS. First reference to these on p. 132, note 1, where they are called “the surviving spiritual principles of men,” and in the text they are those who reincarnate for the good of the world if they choose.
ELECTRICITY AGAIN is mentioned as Life, p. 137, 4th line; also/?.
139, line 17; also a form of “Fohat”; also p. 145, (b).
 
ETHER only partially manifested, and not to be fully so until the 5th Round, p. 140.
THAT ENTITIES ARE CONSTITUTED of many units, each an entity. Thus that “Fohat,” elsewhere called “an Entity,” is not one undivided entity but is made up of others; and that there are as many Fohats as there are worlds. Note 2, p. 143, and p. 145 (b).
ELIXIR OF LIFE. A hint thereupon. Note 2, p. 144.
ELEMENTALS CONCERNED in all forces, e.g. that electricity, magnetism, cohesion, and the like are made up of elementals. These, of course, are not all of one class, but of several, p. 146. Near the end of this page it is inferentially stated that elementals are generated in millions by other beings. This must be, in fact, a transforming process in the atoms. By referring to p. 143 a broad hint will be found as to this in the remarks upon the
“fate of an atom” once caught into any world sphere, and the means of getting out through “a current of efflux.” Is this efflux through the transforming being?
THE MOON. In what sense dead? Only as to her inner principles. Her physical principles are not dead, but have a certain activity, p. 149, note 1. And her spiritual principles have been transferred to this earth, p. 155, note, and p. 156, line 6.
DISAPPEARANCE OF THE MOON will have occurred before this earth has passed through her 7th human round, p. 155, note.
ARCHETYPAL MAN ON GLOBE A. p. 159, last para. Here is a most interesting hint not often referred to and opening up a vista of thought. In the 1st round of the monads in this chain of planets, the monads from the preceding chain of worlds— say the moon’s chain—become human beings on Globe A. But in the 2d round the process alters, and it is in the 4th round that man appears on this earth, the 4th Globe. To quote: “on globe A man rebecomes a mineral, a plant, an animal, on globe B, C, etc. The process changes entirely from the 2d round, but—” This abruptness is to give the hint to intuitional investigators, and opens up as great a problem as the 8th sphere seemed once to be and still perhaps is. But we may ask if on Globe A—unseen by us—
 

 
the archetypal process does not obtain?

From PAGES 160 TO 184, VOL. I
MARS AND MERCURY bear an occult relation to the earth which will not be explained. V. I, p. 163. This is not because no explanation exists, but because, as said (p. 164 footnote), these explanations belong to high grades of initiation.
FIGURES AND NUMBERS the key to the whole system. V.I. p. 164, last line. This has often been stated. Among the Jewish cabalists it is said that the Universe is built by number, weight, and measure, and that harmony is the law reigning over all.Now if the hint given be true, that figures and numbers will not be given for the above reasons, then it is useless for students to bother their minds about the occult meaning of numbers, as so many now do; for this occult meaning cannot be found without assistance.
VENUS IN HER 7TH ROUND. See italicized para, on p. 165, where it is said that that planet is in her last round. This must be her 7th. Hence the men there are as gods to us, and, if the • argument from analogy is to be relied on, some of her great light must emanate from those beings and not all be from the sun.
MARS WITH TWO MOONS NOT HIS OWN. See p. 165, ital. para. This
is taken from the letter by a Master who, replying to the query as to why Mercury and Venus have no satellites, says: “It is because Mars has two to which he has no right and—for other reasons.” That is, we infer that Mars absorbed these moons or dragged them off into his orbit at some time enormously distant and still keeps them. They cannot therefore stand to him in the same relation as our moon does to us. One of the “other reasons” may be that, Venus being in her 7th round, all vestiges of old moons have been sublimated and absorbed into her atmosphere.
ESOTERIC METAPHYSICS must be understood. V. I, p. 169 last para. This rule is laid down by the Adepts and is therefore of greater weight than if formulated by a student. It is useless to attempt to master the system on the lines of modern research, which at best are empirical,
 
very faulty, and leading almost always to a materialization of the whole scheme. Metaphysics deals with the real because the ideal, and physical science with the phenomenal and therefore illusory and changeable.
EVOLUTION OF THE MONAD A BASIC PRINCIPLE, p. 171, 1st line, V. I.
This is laid down with extreme clearness and should not be forgotten. It is not expanded so that inattentive minds may get it through much repetition, but it is postulated once for all. It is still altogether too customary for students to separate the Monads, first from the globes and then from the beings thereon. They cannot be thus divided off. All the globes and their objects are and ever will be monads in stages of evolution, just as we who now study the question are monads ourselves in other stages. The false notion should at once be discarded that there was a time when there were no monads on the globe but that there was here in waiting this ball of earth coming from no one knows where, and that later on monads arrived to occupy it.
If we carry out the principle laid down, then the globe is the creation of the monad; and when the globe is evolved, at once monads needing that experience enter into its corporeality to continue its existence. These later monads are those far behind in the race who will, in some succeeding period of evolution, be in a position to evolve on their own account some new globe in ages yet far distant, for the carrying on of the same process eternally. For, as a material object cannot spring out of nothing, neither can education or knowledge or ability to plan arise out of nothing, but must be based upon and flow from some prior experience or education. So it must be that even now there are monads encased in the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms which have never been farther than that, and will during the remainder of the race evolution continue their education in those lower kingdoms until their time shall come when, the door opening for their exit, they will pass out and higher to make room for others.
LIMIT TO NUMBER OF MONADS. Although there can be no such thing as a metaphysical limit to the monads, yet practically, for the purposes of any one manvantara, there must be a limited number of monads included within its evolutionary sweep. Since a manvantara, however
 

 
vast and inconceivable by us, is wholly a finite period, it sets its own limit—within the illimitable absolute—for the monads attracted to it. This of necessity must be, since the natural world which makes experience possible, being finite because material, sets the limit by reason of its capacity being bounded. See 1st para. p. 171, V. I.
THE FATE OF THE ANTHROPOID APES. This interesting question is raised first on pp. 173 and 175 V. I. and not disposed of. There, in describing the course of the evolution of the monad, it is said that the laggards will not be men at all in this cycle save one exception. On
p. 184, 2d para, it seems to be answered. “In this Round . . . the anthropoids destined to die out in this our race when their monads will be liberated and pass into the astral human forms, or the highest ele- mentals, of the Sixth and Seventh Races, and then into lowest human forms in the fifth Round. . .” These descendants of men through union with animals will thus be karmically rewarded in the next round after this, instead of having to wait until another manvantara.

From PAGES 184 TO 192, VOL. I
THE IMPULSE OF EVOLUTION is found in the force of the spiritual breath. It is not to be supposed because “human monads” cease to come into this chain of globes that therefore there is no impulse. The term “human monad” means that monad which having been through all lower experiences is fitted to inform the so-far perfected human body.
MAN FIRST IN THE 4TH ROUND, p. 187. The flow of human monads is at an end, except that those still incarcerated in the anthropoids have yet to come in. Full blown—or rather those that have been through all lower experiences—must proceed in their order through the strictly human evolution. The necessities of evolution demand this, and the turning point is reached in the fourth round which represents the square figure or number, and all monads in the lower kingdoms have to go on with the work of evolution in those until the next manvantara. At that time the monads now in human forms will have progressed beyond, thus leaving room for those below to come up higher.
 
OUR NATURES FROM WHAT. p. 189. In the note is is distinctly pointed out that the quotation from Shakespeare about our natures being marvelously mixed refers to the parts which the Hierarchies of progressed souls throughout the system to which this globe belongs play in giving us our different combinations.
CORRESPONDENCE OF HUMAN EVOLUTION with the nebular evolution and condensation is to be found on these last lines of p. 191: “as the solid earth began by being a ball of liquid fire, of fiery dust and its protoplasmic phantom, so did man.”
ORIGIN OF WHITE AND BLACK MAGIC. See note on p.I929 where it is stated that at the highest point of development of the Atlantean Race—the fourth—the separation into right and left-hand magic, or consciously good and evil thoughts, took place. Under the action of Karmic law and by the reincarnation over and over again of those engaged in these thoughts, the thoughts were preserved in the realm of mind in the double form of mental deposits and astral impressions. The mental deposits were brought back again and again to earth life, and the astral impressions affected all others who came under their influence. In this way not only were seeds sown in individual minds through their own thoughts, but a vast reservoir of good and bad impressions or pictures has been created in the ethereal medium about us by which sensitive persons are impelled to good and bad acts. And all repetitions of evil thoughts have added to the stock of evil thus remaining to affect and afflict mankind. But as the good also remains, the earnest friends of mankind are able to produce good effects and impressions which in their turn are added to the sum of good. There need be no feeling of injustice on the ground that sensitive persons are affected by evil pictures in the astral light, because such possibility of being thus impressed could not have arisen except through sympathetic attractions for them set up in former lives.

From PAGES 192 TO 200, VOL. I
THE ASTRAL LIGHT is not in its nature truth revealing or “good.” Note 2, p. 197. “It stands in the same relation to Akasa and Anima Mundi as Satan stands to the Deity. They are one and the
 

 
same thing seen from two aspects. “ It may be said that the astral light is the next step above material concerns. It is the first field into which the seer steps in his progress, but it is dangerous because misleading, and misleading because it reverses all things, as well as being the chief reservoir for the bad or material deeds and thoughts of men. Because it is strange, new, and extraordinary, it influences those who see in it, since it presents images of a weird character, and just from its newness and vividness those who see in it are apt to consider it to be of consequence. It is to be studied but not depended upon. Somewhat as the brain has to accustom itself to the reversed image on the retina—turning it straight by effort—so the inner senses have to become accustomed to the reversals made by the Astral Light.
THE FALL INTO GENERATION is explained from p. 192 to p. 198, Stanza VI. Necessarily this raises the question “Why any fall whatever?” The author says: “It was the Fall of Spirit into generation, not the fall of mortal man.” Hence, if this be true, man has not fallen, but is, for this period of evolution, on the way upward. Spirit in order “to become a Self-Conscious Spirit must pass through every cycle of being culminating in its highest point on earth in Man. Spirit per se is an unconscious negative ABSTRACTION. Its purity is inherent, not acquired, by merit; hence, to become the highest Dhyan Chohan it is necessary for each Ego to attain to full self-consciousness as a human, i.e., conscious Being, which is synthesized for us in Man.” (192- 193) So the question, why any fall if it was pure originally, is based on the assumption that to remain in a state of unconscious abstraction is better. This cannot, however, be so. When a period of evolution begins, with spirit at one end of the pole and matter at the other, it is absolutely necessary for spirit to proceed through experience in matter in order that self-consciousness may be acquired. It is a “fall” into matter so far as the fact is concerned, but so far as the result and the object in view it is neither fall nor rise, but the carrying out of the immutable law of the nature of spirit and matter. We ignorantly call it a fall or a curse, because our lower consciousness does not see the great sweep of the cycles nor apprehend the mighty purpose entertained. Following the lines of the philosophy elsewhere laid down, we see that at the
 
close of each grand period of evolution some Egos will have failed to attain the goal, and thus some spirit—if we may say—is left over to be again at a new period differentiated into Egos who shall, helped by Egos of the past now become Dhyan Chohans, once more struggle upward. Such is the immense and unending struggle.
STATES AND PLANES OF CONSCIOUSNESS in Kosmos and Man. p. 199,
2d and 3d paras. It is here stated that of the seven planes of consciousness three are above the entire chain of globes to which the earth belongs, and that the earth is in the lowest of the lower four. But in man, as said here, there are seven states of consciousness which correspond to these seven cosmical planes. He is to “attune the three higher states in himself to the three higher planes in Kosmos.” Necessarily he must have in him centres or seats of energy correspondingly, and, as the author points out, he must awaken those seats to activity, to life, before he can attune them to the higher planes. They are dormant, asleep as it were.
FIRST AND SEVENTH GLOBES of the chain are in the Archetypal plane. Page 200, note to diagram. That is, that on the first globe of the chain—A—the whole model of the succeeding globes is made or laid down, and upon that evolution proceeds up to the 7th, where, all having reached the highest stage of perfection after seven rounds, the complete model is fully realized. This is distinctly hinted in the note, for she says: “not the world as it existed in the Mind of the Deity, but a world made as a first model to be followed and improved upon by the worlds which succeed it physically—though deteriorating in purity.” The reader will remember that in another place it is plainly said that on Globe A man appears, but that in the second round the process changes. If we assume, as we must, concious Beings at work in the scheme of evolution, they have to create the mental model, as it were, of the whole planetary chain and this has to be done at the time of the first globe. The plan is impressed on all the atoms or particles which are to take part in the evolution, and is preserved intact in that plane. The seventh globe is the receiver of the entire result of evolution in each round, and transfers it once more to Globe A, where it proceeds as before, and again the whole mass of evoluting beings is impressed
 

 
with the original plan. This is repeated for every round.
THE THREE HIGHER PLANES OF CONSCIOUSNESS spoken of in third note to diagram on page 200 as being inaccessible to human consciousness as yet, does not involve a contradiction. For the attuning of our three higher states of consciousness to the three higher planes is possible, although attainment to those planes is impossible for ordinary human consciousness. The attempt has to be made so as to come into harmony in ourselves with those planes, so that the potentialities may be made active and development of new faculties made possible.

